1. J Clin Pathol. 1999 Jul;52(7):494-7. doi: 10.1136/jcp.52.7.494.

Is the international normalised ratio (INR) reliable? A trial of comparative 
measurements in hospital laboratory and primary care settings.

Hobbs FD(1), Fitzmaurice DA, Murray ET, Holder R, Rose PE, Roper JL.

Author information:
(1)Department of General Practice, Medical School, University of Birmingham, 
Edgbaston, UK.

AIM: To determine the reliability of international normalised ratio (INR) 
measurement in primary care by practice nurses using near patient testing (NPT), 
in comparison with results obtained within hospital laboratories by varied 
methods.
METHODS: As part of an MRC funded study into primary care oral anticoagulation 
management, INR measurements obtained in general practice were validated against 
values on the same samples obtained in hospital laboratories. A prospective 
comparative trial was undertaken between three hospital laboratories and nine 
general practices. All patients attending general practice based anticoagulant 
clinics had parallel INR estimations performed in general practice and in a 
hospital laboratory.
RESULTS: 405 tests were performed. Comparison between results obtained in the 
practices and those in the reference hospital laboratory (gold standard), which 
used the same method of testing for INR, showed a correlation coefficient of 
0.96. Correlation coefficients comparing the results with the various standard 
laboratory techniques ranged from 0.86 to 0.92. It was estimated that up to 53% 
of tests would have resulted in clinically significant differences (change in 
warfarin dose) depending upon the site and method of testing. The practice 
derived results showed a positive bias ranging from 0.28 to 1.55, depending upon 
the site and method of testing.
CONCLUSIONS: No technical problems associated with INR testing within primary 
care were uncovered. Discrepant INR results are as problematic in hospital 
settings as they are in primary care. These data highlight the failings of the 
INR to standardise when different techniques and reagents are used, an issue 
which needs to be resolved. For primary care to become more involved in 
therapeutic oral anticoagulation monitoring, close links are needed between 
hospital laboratories and practices, particularly with regard to training and 
quality assurance.

DOI: 10.1136/jcp.52.7.494
PMCID: PMC501488
PMID: 10605400 [Indexed for MEDLINE]