1. Gastrointest Endosc. 2000 Aug;52(2):212-7. doi: 10.1067/mge.2000.107719.

Does open access endoscopy close the door to an adequately informed patient?

Staff DM(1), Saeian K, Rochling F, Narayanan S, Kern M, Shaker R, Hogan WJ.

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Medical College of Wisconsin, 
Milwaukee, Wisconsin, USA.

BACKGROUND: The use of open access endoscopy is increasing. Its effect on the 
adequacy of patient informed consent, procedure acceptance and the impact on 
subsequent communication/transfer of procedure results to the patient have not 
been evaluated. The aim of our study was to compare the extent of preknowledge 
of procedures and test explanation, patient medical complexity, information 
transfer and overall patient satisfaction between a patient group referred for 
outpatient open access endoscopy versus a patient group from a gastrointestinal 
(GI) subspecialty clinic.
METHODS: Information was obtained from all patients presenting for outpatient 
upper and lower endoscopy by using a 1-page questionnaire. Patients from the two 
groups who had an outpatient upper/lower endoscopic procedure were contacted by 
phone after the procedure to obtain information with a standardized 
questionnaire.
RESULTS: The open access patients reported receiving significantly less 
information to help them identify the procedure (p < 0.01) and less explanation 
concerning the nature of the procedure than the group of patients referred from 
the subspecialty clinic (p < 0.005). There was no difference between the two 
groups in satisfaction scores for examinations performed under conscious 
sedation. For flexible sigmoidoscopy without sedation, however, the GI clinic 
patient group were more satisfied with their procedure. The majority of 
patients, regardless of access, were more likely to receive endoscopic results 
from a gastroenterologist than the referring physician. Furthermore, the 
patients in the GI clinic group who underwent colonoscopy felt significantly 
better at follow-up.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients undergoing open access procedures are less likely to be 
properly informed about their endoscopic procedure. Our results indicate that 
with open access endoscopy, a defined mechanism needs to be in place for 
communication of endoscopic results to the patient.

DOI: 10.1067/mge.2000.107719
PMID: 10922093 [Indexed for MEDLINE]