1. J Sports Med Phys Fitness. 2002 Sep;42(3):282-8.

Is muscle power related to running speed with changes of direction?

Young WB(1), James R, Montgomery I.

Author information:
(1)School of Human Movement and Sport Sciences, University of Ballarat, 
Ballarat, Victoria, Australia. w.young@ballarat.edu.au

BACKGROUND: The purpose of this study was to identify the relationships between 
leg muscle power and sprinting speed with changes of direction.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: the study was designed to describe relationships between 
physical qualities and a component of sports performance.
SETTING: testing was conducted in an indoor sports hall and a biomechanics 
laboratory.
PARTICIPANTS: 15 male participants were required to be free of injury and have 
recent experience competing in sports involving sprints with changes of 
direction.
MEASURES: subjects were timed in 8 m sprints in a straight line and with various 
changes of direction. They were also tested for bilateral and unilateral leg 
extensor muscle concentric power output by an isokinetic squat and reactive 
strength by a drop jump.
RESULTS: The correlations between concentric power and straight sprinting speed 
were non-significant whereas the relationships between reactive strength and 
straight speed were statistically significant. Correlations between muscle power 
and speed while changing direction were generally low and non-significant for 
concentric leg power with some moderate and significant (p<0.05) coefficients 
found for reactive strength. The participants who turned faster to one side 
tended to have a reactive strength dominance in the leg responsible for the 
push-off action.
CONCLUSIONS: The relationships between leg muscle power and change-of-direction 
speed were not consistent. Reactive strength as measured by the drop jump 
appears to have some importance for lateral change-of-direction speed, possibly 
because of similar push-off actions. It was concluded that reactive strength of 
the leg extensor muscles has some importance in change-of-direction performance 
but the other technical and perceptual factors than influence agility 
performance should also be considered.

PMID: 12094116 [Indexed for MEDLINE]