1. Epilepsia. 2002;43 Suppl 5:196-202. doi: 10.1046/j.1528-1157.43.s.5.6.x.

Do mossy fibers release GABA?

Walker MC(1), Ruiz A, Kullmann DM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Epilepsy, Institute of Neurology, 
Queen Square, London WC1N 3BG, UK. m.walker@ion.ucl.ac.uk

PURPOSE: Mossy fibers are the sole excitatory projection from dentate gyrus 
granule cells to the hippocampus, forming part of the trisynaptic hippocampal 
circuit. They undergo significant plasticity during epileptogenesis and have 
been implicated in seizure generation. Mossy fibers are a highly unusual 
projection in the mammalian brain; in addition to glutamate, they release 
adenosine, dynorphin, zinc, and possibly other peptides. Mossy fiber terminals 
also show intense immunoreactivity for the inhibitory neurotransmitter 
gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), and immunoreactivity for GAD67. The purpose of 
this review is to present physiologic evidence of GABA release by mossy fibers 
and its modulation by epileptic activity.
METHODS: We used hippocampal slices from 3- to 5-week-old guinea pigs and made 
whole-cell voltage clamp recordings from CA3 pyramidal cells. We placed 
stimulating electrodes in stratum granulosum and adjusted their position in 
order to recruit mossy fiber to CA3 projections.
RESULTS: We have shown that electrical stimuli that recruit dentate granule 
cells elicit monosynaptic GABAA receptor-mediated synaptic signals in CA3 
pyramidal neurons. These inhibitory signals satisfy the criteria that 
distinguish mossy fiber-CA3 synapses: high sensitivity to metabotropic 
glutamate-receptor agonists, facilitation during repetitive stimulation, and 
N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor-independent long-term potentiation.
CONCLUSIONS: We have thus provided compelling evidence that there is a mossy 
fiber GABAergic signal. The physiologic role of this mossy fiber GABAergic 
signal is uncertain, but may be of developmental importance. Other evidence 
suggests that this GABAergic signal is transiently upregulated after seizures. 
This could have an inhibitory or disinhibitory effect, and further work is 
needed to elucidate its actual role.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1528-1157.43.s.5.6.x
PMID: 12121321 [Indexed for MEDLINE]