1. Wien Klin Wochenschr. 2002 Mar 28;114(5-6):187-93.

[Vaccine protection in the elderly: are Austrian seniors adequately protected by 
vaccinations?].

[Article in German]

Hainz U(1), Aigner K, Asch E, Berger P, Böhmer F, Feldkircher B, Horwath B, 
Jenewein B, Kassal H, Kistner O, Mack H, Pfeiffer KP, Pils K, Plank J, Renner D, 
Saurwein-Teissl M, Schwanzer E, Trieb K, Grubeck-Loebenstein B.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Biomedizinische Altersforschung, Osterreichischen Akademie der 
Wissenschaften, Innsbruck.

Comment in
    Wien Klin Wochenschr. 2002 Mar 28;114(5-6):167-70.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of the study was to evaluate, if elderly persons are 
sufficiently protected against infectious diseases by vaccination.
PROBANDS AND METHODS: 300 elderly (> 60 years) and 300 young (< 35 years) 
persons from five Austrian cities were recruited according to the criteria of a 
field study. Antibody concentrations against tetanus, diphtheria, tickborne 
encephalitis and influenza were assessed by ELISA or by haemagglutination 
inhibition test. Disease and vaccination histories were recorded.
RESULTS: The results of the study demonstrate that protection against infectious 
diseases was frequently insufficient in the elderly. This was partly due to the 
fact that old persons were not vaccinated according to recommended strategies. 
However, low antibody concentration and a short duration of protective humoral 
immunity were also observed in many elderly persons in spite of regular 
vaccination. This was not only the case in frail, but also in healthy elderlies.
CONCLUSION: The data demonstrate that vaccination has a relatively weak and 
short-lasting effect in old age. The results of the study should stimulate 
discussions about strategies how vaccinations can be made more effective in old 
age. Improved campaigns, shortened vaccination intervals as well as the design 
of novel vaccines tailored to fulfill the specific demands of the aging immune 
system are imaginable.

PMID: 12238307 [Indexed for MEDLINE]