1. Arch Esp Urol. 2002 Sep;55(7):807-11.

[Should circumcision be performed in childhood?].

[Article in Spanish]

Morales Concepción JC(1), Cordiés Jackson E, Guerra Rodríguez M, Mora Casacó B, 
Morales Aranegui A, González Fernández P.

Author information:
(1)Hospital Pediátrico de Centro Habana, Hospital Pediátrico del Cerro, Ciudad 
de La Habana, Cuba.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate prepuce development and retractibility in a group of 
boys. To point out the value of circumcision and prepucial forced dilation 
during childhood.
METHODS: Prepuce development and retractibility were evaluated in 400 boys ages 
between 0-16 year old.
RESULTS: In boys under 1 year prepuce retractibility (assessed only in children 
who did not undergo forced dilation previously) was type I (non retractile) in 
71.5% whereas type V (completely retractile) was only 5.5%. In adolescent boys 
type I prepuce was observed in 1 boy only, 1.6%, whereas type V was observed in 
82.3%. Furthermore, it was observed that at the time of examination for the 
study 106 boys who had undergone forced dilation at an earlier age had 
balano-prepucial adhesions again, which demonstrates that prepuce adheres again 
to glans penis in many boys after a forced dilation is performed. Only 11 boys 
were considered in need for circumcision, three of them for prepucial orifice 
stenosis, which prevented normal micturition, causing a prepucial sac, one case 
due to a constrictive ring below the prepucial edge that would have prevented 
ulterior retractability, two cases with repetitive balanopostitis, and five 
cases secondary to xerosol balanitis, accounting for 2.7% of all examined boys.
CONCLUSIONS: Incomplete separation between prepuce and glans penis is normal and 
common among new-borns, progressing until adolescence to spontaneous separation, 
at which time it is complete in the majority of boys. Accordingly to the 
criteria we have sustained for years and present study's findings, circumcision 
has few indications during childhood, as well as forced prepucial dilation.

PMID: 12380309 [Indexed for MEDLINE]