1. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2003 Apr;84(4):513-7. doi: 10.1053/apmr.2003.50083.

Can continuous physical training counteract aging effect on myoelectric fatigue? 
A surface electromyography study application.

Casale R(1), Rainoldi A, Nilsson J, Bellotti P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Neurophysiology, Salvatore Maugeri Foundation, IRCCS, 
Scientific Institute of Montescano, Montescano, Italy. rcasale@fsm.it

OBJECTIVES: To compare the myoelectric onset of muscle fatigue in physically 
active trained young skiers with respect to elderly skiers and to test whether 
continuous training can counteract the selective loss of type II muscle fibers 
usually observed with aging.
DESIGN: An observational, cross-sectional study of the myoelectric onset of 
muscle fatigue in the left tibialis anterior muscles.
SETTING: Surface electromyography recorded with portable devices at a downhill 
ski rescue lodge in the Italian Alps.
PARTICIPANTS: Fifty-four physically trained, active skiers (43 men, 11 women; 
age range, 24-85y).
INTERVENTIONS: Questionnaire on physical activity and 2 sustained isometric 
voluntary contractions at 20% and 2 at 80% of the maximal voluntary contraction 
level.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Isometric contractions and mean and median spectral 
frequencies calculated to monitor the myoelectric manifestations of muscle 
fatigue.
RESULTS: Fatigue indices did not differ significantly between younger and older 
subjects and, thus, did not show a correlation between myoelectric 
manifestations of muscle fatigue and age in physically active subjects.
CONCLUSION: It appears possible that aging skeletal muscles subjected to 
continuous exercise develop an adaptive response that counteracts the selective 
loss of type II muscle fibers usually observed in the muscles of elderly 
sedentary subjects. Our results suggest that physical activity could be 
considered in the elderly within a broad rehabilitative framework in which 
appropriate and even tailored physical training could be planned to counteract 
the physiologic effects of aging on muscle fiber distribution.

DOI: 10.1053/apmr.2003.50083
PMID: 12690589 [Indexed for MEDLINE]