1. Fetal Diagn Ther. 2003 Sep-Oct;18(5):345-52. doi: 10.1159/000071979.

Do microbiological factors account for poor pregnancy outcome among unmarried 
pregnant women in Poland?

Kalinka J(1), Laudański T, Hanke W, Wasiela M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Perinatology, Institute of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Medical 
University of Łodź, Poland. j.kalinka@csk.am.lodz.pl

OBJECTIVE: Being unmarried is a well-known risk factor for poor pregnancy 
outcome such as preterm delivery and intrauterine growth restriction. The aim of 
this prospective study was to assess the prevalence and risk of bacterial 
vaginosis (BV) and selected bacteria isolated from the lower genital tract and 
to determine the socioeconomic and microbiological characteristics that might be 
responsible for poor pregnancy outcome observed among unmarried pregnant women.
METHODS: The study population comprised 196 pregnant women attending 10 randomly 
selected outpatient maternity units in the Lodz region, central Poland. 
Cervicovaginal samples were obtained between 8 and 16 weeks of gestation. Based 
on Spiegel's criteria, gram-stained vaginal smears were examined for BV and the 
BV-associated flora was sought by culture. To evaluate the risk factors, 
relative risk ratios were calculated using EPI INFO software.
RESULTS: Among 196 pregnant women, 40 (20.4%) were unmarried. BV was diagnosed 
among 55 (28.1%) women studied. In the univariate analysis, unmarried pregnant 
women were characterized by younger age, primary educational level, poor 
economic situation and excessive smoking during pregnancy, as compared to 
married women. The unmarried status was a borderline risk factor for BV (OR = 
1.83, 95% CI 0.94-4.9) after adjustment for age, smoking and education. An 
analysis of the microbiological culture from the lower genital tract revealed 
that unmarried pregnant women had a higher risk for several types of 
pathological microflora, as compared to married women. However, this finding was 
significant only for Mycoplasma hominis. The independent risk factors of M. 
hominis were the young age of the subject and a low concentration of 
Lactobacillus spp.
CONCLUSIONS: The observed socioeconomic, demographic and microbiological 
differences between unmarried and married women could be responsible for the 
poor pregnancy outcome among unmarried pregnant women in Poland. Unmarried 
pregnant women should be covered by comprehensive medical care even before 
pregnancy. Further studies taking into account the role of psychological stress, 
patterns of sexual behavior and substance abuse during pregnancy could help 
identify the factors responsible for adverse pregnancy outcome among unmarried 
pregnant women.

Copyright 2003 S. Karger AG, Basel

DOI: 10.1159/000071979
PMID: 12913347 [Indexed for MEDLINE]