1. Med Klin (Munich). 2003 Sep 15;98(9):477-83. doi: 10.1007/s00063-003-1289-2.

[Can communication with terminally ill patients be taught? Evaluation of a 
course model].

[Article in German]

Weber M(1), Böhler E, Kohler E.

Author information:
(1)III. Medizinische Klinik der Universitätskliniken Mainz und Tumorzentrum 
Rheinland-Pfalz, Mainz. drweber@hospiz-mainz.de

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Communication with terminally ill patients is a main 
responsibility of physicians. However, many physicians feel insufficiently 
prepared for this task. Models of courses resulting in improvements of 
communicative skills of participants have been published mainly in the 
Anglo-American literature. This study describes the realization of a 2-day 
course model based on the experiences of the first three courses of this kind in 
Rhineland-Palatinate, and analyzes changes of participants' communication 
behavior.
METHODS: After each seminary, an evaluation form concerning participants' 
satisfaction with the course was filled in. Furthermore, all course participants 
received a questionnaire at the beginning and at the end of the course, as well 
as 3 months afterwards. The participants were asked to assess their own sense of 
security in seven different communication settings on a visual analog scale, and 
to specify perceived changes in their communication behavior 3 months after the 
course.
RESULTS: The first three courses were attended by 31 participants. Course 
evaluation revealed high satisfaction scores with methods as well as with 
clarity and relevance of the contents. Self-assessment of participants showed a 
growing sense of security in different communication settings. Important 
increases could be demonstrated for communicating a diagnosis of cancer with 
good or less good prognosis, recurrence of cancer or a far progressive cancer 
disease without curative approach. 3 months after the course, participants 
described multiple changes indicating increased sensibility and professionalism 
in communication behavior.
CONCLUSION: The realized communication skills courses resulted in relevant 
changes in communication behaviour and self-confidence of participants. 
Communication with terminally ill patients can be taught.

DOI: 10.1007/s00063-003-1289-2
PMID: 14551704 [Indexed for MEDLINE]