1. Bull World Health Organ. 2004 Mar;82(3):164-71. Epub 2004 Apr 16.

Are WHO/UNAIDS/UNICEF-recommended replacement milks for infants of HIV-infected 
mothers appropriate in the South African context?

Papathakis PC(1), Rollins NC.

Author information:
(1)Africa Centre for Health and Population Studies, Mtubatuba, KwaZulu Natal, 
South Africa. ppapathakis@mrc.ac.za

OBJECTIVE: Little is known about the nutritional adequacy and feasibility of 
breastmilk replacement options recommended by WHO/UNAIDS/UNICEF. The study aim 
was to explore suitability of the 2001 feeding recommendations for infants of 
HIV-infected mothers for a rural region in KwaZulu Natal, South Africa 
specifically with respect to adequacy of micronutrients and essential fatty 
acids, cost, and preparation times of replacement milks.
METHODS: Nutritional adequacy, cost, and preparation time of home-prepared 
replacement milks containing powdered full cream milk (PM) and fresh full cream 
milk (FM) and different micronutrient supplements (2 g UNICEF micronutrient 
sachet, government supplement routinely available in district public health 
clinics, and best available liquid paediatric supplement found in local 
pharmacies) were compared. Costs of locally available ingredients for 
replacement milk were used to calculate monthly costs for infants aged one, 
three, and six months. Total monthly costs of ingredients of commercial and 
home-prepared replacement milks were compared with each other and the average 
monthly income of domestic or shop workers. Time needed to prepare one feed of 
replacement milk was simulated.
FINDINGS: When mixed with water, sugar, and each micronutrient supplement, PM 
and FM provided <50% of estimated required amounts for vitamins E and C, folic 
acid, iodine, and selenium and <75% for zinc and pantothenic acid. PM and FM 
made with UNICEF micronutrient sachets provided 30% adequate intake for niacin. 
FM prepared with any micronutrient supplement provided no more than 32% vitamin 
D. All PMs provided more than adequate amounts of vitamin D. Compared with the 
commercial formula, PM and FM provided 8-60% of vitamins A, E, and C, folic 
acid, manganese, zinc, and iodine. Preparations of PM and FM provided 11% 
minimum recommended linoleic acid and 67% minimum recommended alpha-linolenic 
acid per 450 ml mixture. It took 21-25 minutes to optimally prepare 120 ml of 
replacement feed from PM or commercial infant formula and 30-35 minutes for the 
fresh milk preparation. PM or FM cost approximately 20% of monthly income 
averaged over the first six months of life; commercial formula cost 
approximately 32%.
CONCLUSION: No home-prepared replacement milks in South Africa meet all 
estimated micronutrient and essential fatty acid requirements of infants aged <6 
months. Commercial infant formula is the only replacement milk that meets all 
nutritional needs. Revisions of WHO/UNAIDS/UNICEF HIV and infant feeding course 
replacement milk options are needed. If replacement milks are to provide total 
nutrition, preparations should include vegetable oils, such as soybean oil, as a 
source of linoleic and alpha-linolenic acids, and additional vitamins and 
minerals.

PMCID: PMC2585935
PMID: 15112004 [Indexed for MEDLINE]