1. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2005 Feb;87(2):332-8. doi: 10.2106/JBJS.C.01467.

Can normal knee kinematics be restored with unicompartmental knee replacement?

Patil S(1), Colwell CW Jr, Ezzet KA, D'Lima DD.

Author information:
(1)Orthopaedic Research Laboratories, Scripps Clinic Center for Orthopaedic 
Research and Education, 11025 North Torrey Pines Road, Suite 140, La Jolla, CA 
92037, USA.

BACKGROUND: Unicompartmental replacement can be an alternative to tibial 
osteotomy in younger, active patients with unicompartmental knee disease. In 
unicompartmental replacement, the other compartments and knee ligaments are 
largely untouched. Therefore, it was hypothesized that the knee kinematics after 
unicompartmental replacement may also be unchanged. To test this hypothesis, 
knee kinematics and quadriceps tension were recorded before and after 
replacement with a unicompartmental design and then with a tricompartmental 
design.
METHODS: Six human cadaver knees were tested before implantation, after 
implantation with a bicruciate-retaining unicompartmental knee prosthesis, and 
after implantation with a posterior cruciate-retaining tricompartmental knee 
prosthesis. The unicompartmental prosthesis was initially implanted, and it was 
then revised to a total condylar knee replacement. The knee kinematics were 
measured with use of an electromagnetic tracking device while the knee was put 
through dynamic simulated stair-climbing under peak flexion moments of 
approximately 40 N-m. Quadriceps tension was also measured for all three 
conditions.
RESULTS: No significant differences in tibial axial rotation were noted between 
the intact and unicompartmental conditions. However, tricompartmental 
replacement significantly affected tibial axial rotation (p = 0.001). Femoral 
rollback was not significantly affected by either unicompartmental or 
tricompartmental arthroplasty. Quadriceps tension was also similar among all 
three conditions.
CONCLUSIONS: In this in vitro cadaver study, the tricompartmental replacement 
significantly changed knee kinematics while the unicompartmental replacement 
preserved normal knee kinematics.

DOI: 10.2106/JBJS.C.01467
PMID: 15687156 [Indexed for MEDLINE]