1. Hum Reprod. 2006 Mar;21(3):701-4. doi: 10.1093/humrep/dei365. Epub 2005 Oct
27.

Is controlled ovarian stimulation in intrauterine insemination an acceptable 
therapy in couples with unexplained non-conception in the perspective of 
multiple pregnancies?

van Rumste MM(1), den Hartog JE, Dumoulin JC, Evers JL, Land JA.

Author information:
(1)Research Institute Growth and Development (GROW) and Department of Obstetrics 
and Gynaecology, Academic Hospital Maastricht, P.O.Box 5800, 6202 AZ Maastricht, 
The Netherlands. m.vanrumste@mmc.nl

BACKGROUND: Controlled ovarian stimulation (COS) with intrauterine insemination 
(IUI) is a common treatment in couples with unexplained non-conception. 
Induction of multifollicular growth is considered to improve pregnancy outcome, 
but it contains an increased risk of multiple pregnancies and ovarian 
hyperstimulation syndrome. In this study the impact of the number of follicles 
(>14 mm) on the ongoing pregnancy rate (PR) and multiple PR was evaluated in the 
first four treatment cycles.
METHODS: A retrospective cohort study was performed in all couples with 
unexplained non-conception undergoing COS-IUI in the Academic Hospital of 
Maastricht. The main outcome measure was ongoing PR. Secondary outcomes were 
ongoing multiple PR, number of follicles of >or=14 mm, and order of treatment 
cycle.
RESULTS: Three hundred couples were included. No significant difference was 
found in ongoing PR between women with one, two, three or four follicles 
respectively (P=0.54), but in women with two or more follicles 12/73 pregnancies 
were multiples. Ongoing PR was highest in the first treatment cycle and declined 
significantly with increasing cycle order (P=0.006), while multiple PR did not 
change.
CONCLUSIONS: In COS-IUI for unexplained non-conception, induction of more than 
one follicle did not improve the ongoing PR, but increased the risk of multiple 
pregnancies. Multiple PR remained high in the first four cycles with 
multifollicular stimulation. Therefore, in order to reduce the number of 
multiple pregnancies, in all IUI cycles for unexplained non-conception 
monofollicular growth should be aimed at.

DOI: 10.1093/humrep/dei365
PMID: 16253970 [Indexed for MEDLINE]