1. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2007 Feb;22(2):158-64. doi: 
10.1111/j.1440-1746.2006.04491.x.

Acute hepatitis C in Israel: a predominantly iatrogenic disease?

Lurie Y(1), Landau DA, Blendis L, Baruch Y, Veitsman E, Ackermann Z, 
Zelber-Sagie S, Halpern Z, Oren R.

Author information:
(1)Liver Disease Unit, Gastroenterology Institute, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical 
Center, Tel Aviv, Israel. dr_lurie@tasmc.health.gov.il

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Acute hepatitis C virus infection in the era of universal 
screening of blood products has not disappeared, and is thought to be 
transmitted primarily via injecting drug use. A growing body of evidence 
supports iatrogenic transmission as an important mode of transmission. The aim 
of this study was to examine transmission routes and clinical characteristics in 
a group of patients with acute hepatitis C in Israel.
METHODS: A retrospective chart review was conducted in three different liver 
clinics in Israel, of all new hepatitis C patients. Patients identified as 
possible acute hepatitis C were re-interviewed and all other sources such as 
blood bank records and pre-employment check-ups reviewed in order to establish 
the diagnosis of acute hepatitis C infection and to identify the transmission 
route.
RESULTS: Twenty-nine patients were found to have acute hepatitis C, representing 
0.75% of all new referrals for hepatitis C. The most frequent (65%) mode of 
transmission was iatrogenic involving several, often minimal, procedures and 
clinical settings. The group in which iatrogenic transmission was suspected was 
older and the patients more often in monogamous relationship compared with other 
transmission routes groups. Injecting drug use was the second most common route 
of infection. Spontaneous seroconversion has occurred in approximately one third 
of the patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Acute hepatitis C in the post universal blood products screening 
era was found to be predominantly an iatrogenic disease in the investigated 
localities. This finding should direct attention and resources towards the 
development and implementation of preventive measures.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1440-1746.2006.04491.x
PMID: 17295865 [Indexed for MEDLINE]