1. Arch Dis Child. 2007 Oct;92(10):876-80. doi: 10.1136/adc.2006.104869. Epub
2007  Jun 26.

Is there an intrauterine influence on obesity? Evidence from parent child 
associations in the Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and Children (ALSPAC).

Davey Smith G(1), Steer C, Leary S, Ness A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Social Medicine, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK. 
zetkin@bristol.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: It has been suggested that increasing obesity levels in young women 
lead to intrauterine environments that, in turn, stimulate increased obesity 
among their offspring, generating an intergenerational acceleration of obesity 
levels. If this mechanism is important, the association of maternal body mass 
index (BMI) with offspring BMI should be stronger than the association of 
paternal with offspring BMI.
OBJECTIVE: To compare the relative strengths of association of maternal and 
paternal BMI with offspring BMI at age 7.5, taking into account the possible 
effect of non-paternity.
METHODS: We compared strength of association for maternal-offspring and 
paternal-offspring BMI for 4654 complete parent-offspring trios in the Avon 
Longitudinal Study of Parents and Children (ALSPAC), using unstandardised and 
standardised regression analysis. We carried out a sensitivity analysis to 
investigate the influence of non-paternity on these associations.
RESULTS: The strength of association between parental BMI and offspring BMI at 
age 7.5 was similar for both parents. Taking into account correlations between 
maternal and paternal BMI, performing standardised rather than unstandardised 
regression and carrying out a sensitivity analysis for non-paternity emphasised 
the robustness of the general similarity of the associations. The associations 
between high parental BMI (top decile) and offspring BMI are also similar for 
both parents.
CONCLUSION: Comparison of mother-offspring and father-offspring associations for 
BMI suggests that intergenerational acceleration mechanisms do not make an 
important contribution to levels of childhood BMI within the population. 
Associations at later ages and for different components of body composition now 
require study.

DOI: 10.1136/adc.2006.104869
PMCID: PMC2083247
PMID: 17595200 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None.