1. J Refract Surg. 2008 Jan;24(1):S90-6. doi: 10.3928/1081597X-20080101-16.

Biomechanical and wound healing characteristics of corneas after excimer laser 
keratorefractive surgery: is there a difference between advanced surface 
ablation and sub-Bowman's keratomileusis?

Dawson DG(1), Grossniklaus HE, McCarey BE, Edelhauser HF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA.

PURPOSE: To describe the biomechanical and wound healing characteristics of 
corneas after excimer laser keratorefractive surgery.
METHODS: Histologic, ultrastructural, and cohesive tensile strength evaluations 
were performed on 25 normal human corneal specimens, 206 uncomplicated LASIK 
specimens, 17 uncomplicated sub-Bowman's keratomileusis (SBK) specimens, 4 
uncomplicated photorefractive keratectomy (PRK) specimens, 2 uncomplicated 
advanced surface ablation (ASA) specimens, 5 keratoconus specimens, 12 
postoperative LASIK ectasia specimens, and 1 postoperative PRK ectasia specimen 
and compared to previously published studies.
RESULTS: Histologic and ultrastructural studies of normal corneas showed 
significant differences in the direction of collagen fibrils and/or the degree 
of lamellar interweaving in Bowman's layer, the anterior third of the corneal 
stroma, the posterior two-thirds of the corneal stroma, and Descemet's membrane. 
Cohesive tensile strength testing directly supported these morphologic findings 
as the stronger, more rigid regions of the cornea were located anteriorly and 
peripherally. This suggests that PRK and ASA, and secondarily SBK, should be 
biomechanically safer than conventional LASIK with regard to risk for causing 
keratectasia after surgery. Because adult human corneal stromal wounds heal 
slowly and incompletely, all excimer laser keratorefractive surgical techniques 
still have some distinct disadvantages due to inadequate reparative wound 
healing. Despite reducing some of the risk for corneal haze compared to 
conventional PRK, ASA cases still can develop corneal haze or breakthrough haze 
from the hypercellular fibrotic stromal scarring. In contrast, similar to 
conventional LASIK, SBK still has the short- and long-term potential for 
interface wound complications from the hypocellular primitive stromal scar.
CONCLUSIONS: Ophthalmic pathology and basic science research show that SBK and 
ASA are improvements in excimer laser keratorefractive surgery compared to 
conventional LASIK or PRK, particularly with regard to maintaining corneal 
biomechanics and perhaps moderately reducing the risk of corneal haze. However, 
most of the disadvantages caused by wound healing issues remain.

DOI: 10.3928/1081597X-20080101-16
PMID: 18269157 [Indexed for MEDLINE]