1. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2008 May;20(5):423-9. doi: 
10.1097/MEG.0b013e3282f4de6e.

Gluten tolerance in adult patients with celiac disease 20 years after diagnosis?

Hopman EG(1), von Blomberg ME, Batstra MR, Morreau H, Dekker FW, Koning F, 
Lamers CB, Mearin ML.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dietetics and Nutrition, Leiden University Medical Center, 
Leiden, The Netherlands. G.D.Hopman@lumc.nl

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Celiac disease (CD) is believed to be a permanent 
intolerance to gluten. A number of patients, however, discontinue the 
gluten-free diet (GFD) without developing symptoms or signs. The aim of our 
study was to investigate whether CD patients are capable of developing tolerance 
to gluten.
METHODS: All 77 adult patients from our hospital known to have biopsy-proven CD 
for more than 10 years were invited to participate. We investigated symptoms, 
gluten consumption, antibodies for CD and other autoimmunity, human leukocyte 
antigen (HLA)-typing, bone mineral density, and performed small bowel biopsies. 
Tolerance was defined as no immunological or histological signs of CD while 
consuming gluten.
RESULTS: Sixty-six patients accepted participation, but after review of the 
diagnostic biopsies 53 were found to have true CD. Twenty-three percent of 
patients had a gluten-containing diet, 15% admitted gluten transgression and 62% 
followed the GFD. Patients on a GFD had significantly more osteoporosis. Normal 
small bowel mucosa was found in four of eight on gluten-containing diet and in 
four of four with gluten transgression. Two patients were considered to have 
developed tolerance to gluten. One of them was HLA-DQ2/DQ8 negative.
CONCLUSION: Development of tolerance to gluten seems possible in some patients 
with CD. Further follow-up will show whether this tolerance is permanent or only 
a long-term return to latency. This feature may be associated with genetic 
characteristics, especially with HLA genotypes that differ from DQ2 or DQ8. More 
insight into the mechanisms of the development of gluten tolerance may help to 
distinguish those CD patients that might not require life-long GFD.

DOI: 10.1097/MEG.0b013e3282f4de6e
PMID: 18403944 [Indexed for MEDLINE]