1. Kathmandu Univ Med J (KUMJ). 2007 Jan-Mar;5(1):68-71.

Can homemade alcohol (Raksi) be useful for preserving dead bodies? An experiment 
on wistar albino rats.

Dhungel S(1), Maskey D, Jha CB, Bhattacharya S, Paudel BH, Shrestha RN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy, BP Koirala Institute of Health Sciences, Dharan, 
Nepal. docsd2002@yahoo.com

INTRODUCTION: Embalming is the through disinfection and art of preserving bodies 
after death using chemical substances. It keeps a body life like in appearance 
during the time it lies in a state prior to funeral.
OBJECTIVE: This study was undertaken to investigate the effectiveness of Raksi 
in sacrificed rats in arresting postmortem changes and establishing scientific 
fact whether Raksi can be an alternative to standard embalming constituent if it 
is not available.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: 50 albino rats were systematically randomized into control 
and experiment groups. Raksi and distilled water were injected for embalming 
purpose intraventricularly in experiment and control groups of rats respectively 
and kept for 48 to 96 hours for observation for postmortem changes.
RESULT: Observations made at 48 and 72 hours of embalming revealed that Raksi 
can arrest postmortem changes in the rats up to 72 hours (3rd day) successfully 
in the experimental group whereas moderate to severe postmortem changes were 
seen in the control group. The experimental group showed mild degree of 
putrefactive changes, liberation of gases and liquefaction of tissues only at 96 
hours (4th day) of embalming.
DISCUSSION: The Raksi used in this experiment contained 34% of alcohol, which 
was determined by an alcohol hydrometer. Experiment clearly demonstrated from 
its result that raksi can be utilised temporarily for embalming since it 
contains alcohol and has preservative, bactericidal and disinfectant properties.
CONCLUSION: It is concluded from the study that this knowledge if applied to 
dead human subjects, may preserve dead bodies temporarily allowing delayed 
funeral.

PMID: 18603989 [Indexed for MEDLINE]