1. J Epidemiol Community Health. 2009 Feb;63(2):113-20. doi: 
10.1136/jech.2008.078352. Epub 2008 Sep 18.

Household and food shopping environments: do they play a role in socioeconomic 
inequalities in fruit and vegetable consumption? A multilevel study among Dutch 
adults.

Giskes K(1), van Lenthe FJ, Kamphuis CB, Huisman M, Brug J, Mackenbach JP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Public Health, Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotterdam, the 
Netherlands. k.giskes@qut.edu.au

BACKGROUND: Fruit and vegetables are protective of a number of chronic diseases; 
however, their intakes have been shown to vary by socioeconomic position (SEP). 
Household and food shopping environmental factors are thought to contribute to 
these differences. To determine whether household and food shopping 
environmental factors are associated with fruit and vegetable (FV) intakes, and 
contribute to socioeconomic inequalities in FV consumption.
METHODS: Cross-sectional data were obtained by a postal questionnaire among 4333 
adults (23-85 years) living in 168 neighbourhoods in the south-eastern 
Netherlands. Participants agreed/disagreed with a number of statements about the 
characteristics of their household and food shopping environments, including 
access, prices and quality. Education was used to characterise socioeconomic 
position (SEP). Main outcome measures were whether or not participants consumed 
fruit or vegetables on a daily basis. Multilevel logistic regression models 
examined between-area variance in FV consumption and associations between 
characteristics of the household and food shopping environments and FV 
consumption.
RESULTS: Only a few household and food shopping environmental factors were 
significantly associated with fruit and vegetable consumption, and their 
prevalence was low. Participants who perceived FV to be expensive were more 
likely to consume them. There were significant socioeconomic inequalities in 
fruit and vegetable consumption (ORs of not consuming fruit and vegetables were 
4.26 and 5.47 among the lowest-educated groups for fruit and vegetables, 
respectively); however, these were not explained by any household or food 
shopping environmental factors.
CONCLUSIONS: Improving access to FV in the household and food shopping 
environments will only make a small contribution to improving population 
consumption levels, and may only have a limited effect in reducing socioeconomic 
inequalities in their consumption.

DOI: 10.1136/jech.2008.078352
PMID: 18801797 [Indexed for MEDLINE]