1. Rev Neurol (Paris). 2009 Dec;165(12):1111-6. doi:
10.1016/j.neurol.2008.08.014.

[Cerebromediastinal tuberculosis in a child with a probable Say-Barber-Miller 
syndrome: a causative link?].

[Article in French]

Kechaou I(1), Rouissi A, Kraoua I, Regayeg A, Turki I, Ben Hamouda M, 
Gouider-Khouja N.

Author information:
(1)Service de neurologie pédiatrique, institut national de neurologie, 1007 La 
Rabta, Tunis, Tunisie.

INTRODUCTION: Tuberculosis continues to be a public health problem in emerging 
countries with a recent evidence of increased incidence of extrapulmonary 
localization in developed countries probably linked to HIV. To our knowledge the 
occurrence of cerebro-mediastinal tuberculosis in an immuno-competent child has 
not been previously described; moreover the child we describe has a probable 
Say-Barber-Miller syndrome. We discuss a putative causative link between this 
syndrome and the occurrence of tuberculosis.
CASE REPORT: A seven-year-old girl presented to our department with a history of 
infantile encephalopathy since birth characterized by a facial dysmorphy 
(evocative of a bird face), microcephaly, and mental retardation, and with 
recurrent infections. The child had complained of back pain for several months; 
the parents reported anorexia, loss of weight. Spinal and cerebral MRI showed a 
mediastinal mass involving the spine and cerebral lesions evocative of 
tuberculomas. The tuberculin interdermal reaction was positive. Culture of a 
vertebral biopsy was positive for Koch bacillus. Anti-tuberculosis treatment 
improved general and local status. An extensive immunological work-up was 
normal.
CONCLUSION: [corrected] This observation is exceptional in many aspects: very 
early age of onset of extrapulmonary tuberculosis, no immune deficit, 
association with a rare congenital neurological syndrome. We discuss the 
possible link between this entity and the occurrence of tuberculosis.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurol.2008.08.014
PMID: 19108857 [Indexed for MEDLINE]