1. Clin Breast Cancer. 2009 Feb;9(1):34-8. doi: 10.3816/CBC.2009.n.006.

Aromatase inhibitor-related musculoskeletal symptoms: is preventing osteoporosis 
the key to eliminating these symptoms?

Muslimani AA(1), Spiro TP, Chaudhry AA, Taylor HC, Jaiyesimi I, Daw HA.

Author information:
(1)Division of Clinical and Molecular Endocrinology, Cleveland Clinic Cancer, 
Cleveland, OH, USA. alaf73@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: Aromatase inhibitors (AIs) are an effective treatment for 
postmenopausal women with hormone receptor-positive breast cancer. However, 
patients receiving AIs report a higher incidence of musculoskeletal symptoms and 
bone fractures; the mechanism and risk factors for this correlation are not well 
studied. The aim of this study was to correlate these musculoskeletal symptoms 
and bone fractures in patients receiving AIs with bone mineral density (BMD), 
previous tamoxifen use, and administration of calcium/bisphosphonate (Ca/Bis).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We reviewed charts of 856 patients with hormone 
receptor-positive nonmetastatic breast cancer seen at our institution between 
January 1999 and October 2007. A total of 316 patients met the inclusion 
criteria of treatment with one of the AIs for > or = 3 months and availability 
of a dualenergy X-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) during this treatment. Arthralgia, 
generalized bone pain and/or myalgia, bone fracture after beginning AIs, any 
tamoxifen treatment, and Ca/Bis therapy were recorded.
RESULTS: Our study demonstrates a significant association between symptoms and 
DEXA-BMD results (P < .001). Similarly, the group receiving tamoxifen before AIs 
had fewer patients with arthralgia or generalized bone pain/myalgia or bone 
fracture (P < .001). Furthermore, the group receiving AIs plus Ca/Bis had more 
patients without musculoskeletal symptoms and had fewer fractures. Finally, the 
group receiving steroidal AIs compared with nonsteroidal AIs had more patients 
with arthralgia or generalized bone pain and/or myalgia, and bone fractures (P < 
.001).
CONCLUSION: Patients on AIs who develop osteoporosis are at increased risk of 
musculoskeletal symptoms and bone fracture. Comedication with Ca/Bis reduces the 
likelihood for osteoporosis and musculoskeletal symptoms. Patients who received 
tamoxifen before AIs were less likely to develop AI-related musculoskeletal 
symptoms. We recommend that patients on AIs should be offered Ca/Bis to reduce 
the incidence of musculoskeletal symptoms and fracture, especially if patients 
are receiving steroidal AI and/or did not receive tamoxifen before AIs.

DOI: 10.3816/CBC.2009.n.006
PMID: 19299238 [Indexed for MEDLINE]