1. Hum Reprod. 2009 Oct;24(10):2549-57. doi: 10.1093/humrep/dep222. Epub 2009 Jun
 20.

Is there a uniform basal endometrial gene expression profile during the 
implantation window in women who became pregnant in a subsequent ICSI cycle?

Allegra A(1), Marino A, Coffaro F, Lama A, Rizza G, Scaglione P, Sammartano F, 
Santoro A, Volpes A.

Author information:
(1)Andros Day Surgery, Reproductive Medicine Unit, Palermo, Italy. 
allegra@centroandros.it

BACKGROUND: To understand which genes are really involved in the implantation 
process, we planned to study the gene basal expression profile during the window 
of implantation (WOI) of patients who became pregnant in a subsequent ICSI 
cycle.
METHODS: Women attending their first ICSI cycle at ANDROS Day Surgery for severe 
male factor infertility were included in the study. An endometrial biopsy was 
performed during the WOI, in one of the last two cycles before the ICSI cycle. 
Forty-seven selected gene profiles were analyzed using Low Density Array 
technology. Only biopsies from women who subsequently became pregnant were 
evaluated, to exclude any bias regarding embryo viability and embryo transfer 
difficulties.
RESULTS: Fifteen patients were included in the analysis as they became pregnant 
after ICSI procedure. Four of 47 selected genes were excluded from the analysis. 
Of the 43 genes analyzed, only 6 genes (VEGFA, PLA2G2A, ALPL, LIF, NNMT and 
STC1) showed a statistically uniform expression among patients who subsequently 
became pregnant. For all the other genes analyzed there were considerable 
differences in their expression levels amongst women who subsequently became 
pregnant.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that very few genes, which change their expression 
level during the WOI, show a quantitative homogeneous expression in 
endometrially-receptive patients. In conclusion, in this study only six genes 
showed a homogeneous expression, and are probably involved in embryo 
implantation mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1093/humrep/dep222
PMID: 19542542 [Indexed for MEDLINE]