1. Cancer. 2009 Dec 1;115(23):5579-88. doi: 10.1002/cncr.24600.

Standardizing care in medical oncology: are Web-based systems the answer?

Hains IM(1), Fuller JM, Ward RL, Pearson SA.

Author information:
(1)University of New South Wales Cancer Research Centre, University of New South 
Wales, Sydney, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Medical oncology is embracing information technology to standardize 
care and improve patient outcomes, with a range of Web-based systems used 
internationally. The authors' aim was to determine the factors affecting the 
uptake and use of a Web-based protocol system for medical oncology in the 
Australian setting.
METHODS: The authors conducted 50 interviews and observed medical oncology 
physicians, nurses, and pharmacists in their treatment setting at 6 hospitals in 
different geographic locations.
RESULTS: The Web-based system plays a major role in guiding oncology treatment 
across participating sites. However, its use varies according to hospital 
location, clinician roles, and experience. A range of issues impact on 
clinicians' attitudes toward and use of the Web-based system. Important factors 
are clinician-specific (eg, their need for autonomy and perceptions of lack of 
time) or environmental (eg, hospital policy on protocol use, endorsement of the 
system, and the availability of appropriate infrastructure, such as sufficient 
computers). The level of education received regarding the system was also found 
to be integral to its ongoing use.
CONCLUSIONS: Although the provision of high-quality evidence-based resources, 
electronic or otherwise, is essential for standardizing care and improving 
patient outcomes, the authors' findings demonstrate that this alone does not 
ensure uptake. It is important to understand end-users, the environment in which 
they operate, and the basic infrastructure required to implement such a system. 
Implementation must also be accompanied by continuing education and endorsement 
to ensure both long-term sustainability and use of the system to its full 
potential.

(c) 2009 American Cancer Society.

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.24600
PMID: 19711462 [Indexed for MEDLINE]