1. Pediatrics. 2009 Nov;124(5):1319-24. doi: 10.1542/peds.2009-0730. Epub 2009
Oct  12.

Autoerotic asphyxiation: secret pleasure--lethal outcome?

Cowell DD(1).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Psychiatry and Behavioral Medicine, and Graduate Medical 
Education, Marshall University, Joan C Edwards School of Medicine, Huntington, 
West Virginia 25701, USA. cowell@marshall.edu

OBJECTIVE: Voluntary asphyxiation among children, preteens, and adolescents by 
hanging or other means of inducing hypoxia/anoxia to enhance sexual excitement 
is not uncommon and can lead to unintended death. This study addresses 
autoerotic asphyxiation (AEA) with the intent of increasing pediatricians' 
knowledge of the syndrome and awareness of its typical onset among young 
patients. AEA is characteristically a clandestine and elusive practice. Provided 
with relevant information, pediatricians can identify the syndrome, demonstrate 
a willingness to discuss concerns about it, ameliorate distress, and possibly 
prevent a tragedy.
METHODS: A retrospective study was undertaken of published cases both fatal and 
nonfatal and included personal communications, referenced citations, clinical 
experience, and theoretical formulations as to causation. Characteristic AEA 
manifestations, prevalence, age range, methods of inducing hypoxia/anoxia, and 
gender weighting are presented. All sources were used as a basis for additional 
considerations of etiology and possibilities for intervention.
RESULTS: AEA can be conceptualized as a personalized, ritualized, and symbolic 
biopsychosocial drama. It seems to be a reenactment of intense emotional 
feeling-states involving an identification and sadomasochistic relationship with 
a female figure. Inept AEA practitioners can miscalculate the peril of the 
situation that they have contrived and for numerous reasons lose their gamble 
with death.
CONCLUSIONS: Pediatricians should be alert to the earliest manifestations of 
AEA. Awareness of choking games among the young and, of those, a subset who 
eventually progress to potentially fatal AEA is strongly encouraged among all 
primary care professionals who may be able to interrupt the behavior.

DOI: 10.1542/peds.2009-0730
PMID: 19822586 [Indexed for MEDLINE]