1. Cancer Epidemiol. 2009 Nov;33(5):387-90. doi: 10.1016/j.canep.2009.10.011.
Epub  2009 Nov 20.

Can the condition of the cell microenvironment of mediastinal lymph nodes help 
predict the risk of metastases in non-small cell lung cancer?

Zieliński P(1), Dyszkiewicz W, Piwkowski CT, Dworacki G, Gasiorowski L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, 62 
Szamarzewski St., 60-569 Poznan, Poland.

BACKGROUND: The aim of this study was to analyze the properties of the immune 
cell microenvironment of regional lymph nodes (LNs) positive for lung cancer.
METHODS: Twenty-four patients operated on for stages T1 and T2 of the NSCLC, 
were enrolled in the study. Peripheral blood and LN tissue were obtained from 
different lymph node sites and levels. As a control, LN tissue was taken from 
patients diagnosed with emphysema or pneumothorax. The cells from randomly 
chosen LN were tested by multi-color flow cytometry. Separate portions of LN 
were snap-frozen and examined for the presence of cytokeratin positive cells 
(CK). Propensity for apoptosis, level of TCR zeta chain expression of T cells 
and the number and maturation status of dendritic cells were confronted with the 
presence of CK-positive cells.
RESULTS: The presence of metastases correlated with the downregulation of TCR 
zeta, especially CD8(+) T cells. The most striking feature was the reduction in 
the number of myeloid CD11c(+) dendritic cells in the LN of patients with LN 
metastases. This could be a reflection of the immunodeficient state observed in 
lung cancer patients. Even in the absence of metastases in the regional LN, the 
same type of changes in the LN microenvironment were observed in those LN 
located nearer the primary tumor.
CONCLUSIONS: The preliminary results of this study suggest that this approach 
may be helpful as an independent tumor staging factor. It is also worth noting 
that part of the staging process could also be based on features describing the 
immune cells in the peripheral blood.

DOI: 10.1016/j.canep.2009.10.011
PMID: 19931500 [Indexed for MEDLINE]