1. J Hypertens. 2010 Sep;28(9):1944-50. doi: 10.1097/HJH.0b013e32833c21af.

Is leptin involved in phagocytic NADPH oxidase overactivity in obesity? 
Potential clinical implications.

Fortuño A(1), Bidegain J, Baltanás A, Moreno MU, Montero L, Landecho MF, Beloqui 
O, Díez J, Zalba G.

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Sciences, Centre for Applied Medical Research, 
Pamplona, Spain. afortuno@unav.es

OBJECTIVES: Hyperleptinemia and oxidative stress play a major role in the 
development of cardiovascular diseases in obesity. This study aimed to 
investigate whether there is a relationship between plasma levels of leptin and 
phagocytic nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) oxidase activity, 
and its potential relevance in the vascular remodeling in obese patients.
METHODS: The study was performed in 164 obese and 94 normal-weight individuals 
(controls). NADPH oxidase activity was evaluated by luminescence in phagocytic 
cells. Levels of leptin were quantified by ELISA in plasma samples. Carotid 
intima-media thickness (cIMT) was measured by ultrasonography. In addition, we 
performed in-vitro experiments in human peripheral blood mononuclear cells and 
murine macrophages.
RESULTS: Phagocytic NADPH oxidase activity and leptin levels were enhanced (P < 
0.05) in obese patients compared with controls. NADPH oxidase activity 
positively correlated with leptin in obese patients. This association remained 
significant in a multivariate analysis. cIMT was higher (P < 0.05) in obese 
patients compared with controls. In addition, cIMT also correlated positively 
with leptin and NADPH oxidase activity in obese patients. In-vitro studies 
showed that leptin induced NADPH oxidase activation. Inhibition of the 
leptin-induced NADPH oxidase activity by wortmannin and bisindolyl maleimide 
suggested a direct involvement of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase and protein 
kinase C pathways, respectively. Finally, leptin-induced NADPH oxidase 
activation promoted macrophage proliferation.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings show that phagocytic NADPH oxidase activity is 
increased in obesity and is related to preclinical atherosclerosis in this 
condition. We also suggest that hyperleptinemia may contribute to phagocytic 
NADPH oxidase overactivity in obesity.

DOI: 10.1097/HJH.0b013e32833c21af
PMID: 20577124 [Indexed for MEDLINE]