1. Health Policy. 2010 Nov;98(1):74-80. doi: 10.1016/j.healthpol.2010.06.005.

Does case-mix based reimbursement stimulate the development of process-oriented 
care delivery?

Vos L(1), Dückers ML, Wagner C, van Merode GG.

Author information:
(1)NIVEL, Netherlands Institute for Health Services Research, P.O. Box 1568, 
3500 BN Utrecht, The Netherlands. l.vos@lumc.nl

OBJECTIVES: Reimbursement based on the total care of a patient during an acute 
episode of illness is believed to stimulate management and clinicians to reduce 
quality problems like waiting times and poor coordination of care delivery. 
Although many studies already show that this kind of case-mix based 
reimbursement leads to more efficiency, it remains unclear whether care 
coordination improved as well. This study aims to explore whether case-mix based 
reimbursement stimulates development of care coordination by the use of care 
programmes, and a process-oriented way of working.
METHODS: Data for this study were gathered during the winter of 2007/2008 in a 
survey involving all Dutch hospitals. Descriptive and structural equation 
modelling (SEM) analyses were conducted.
RESULTS: SEM reveals that adoption of the case-mix reimbursement within 
hospitals' budgeting processes stimulates hospitals to establish care programmes 
by the use of process-oriented performance measures. However, the implementation 
of care programmes is not (yet) accompanied by a change in focus from function 
(the delivery of independent care activities) to process (the delivery of care 
activities as being connected to a chain of interdependent care activities).
CONCLUSION: This study demonstrates that hospital management can stimulate the 
development of care programmes by the adoption of case-mix reimbursement within 
hospitals' budgeting processes. Future research is recommended to confirm this 
finding and to determine whether the establishment of care programmes will in 
time indeed lead to a more process-oriented view of professionals.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.healthpol.2010.06.005
PMID: 20605051 [Indexed for MEDLINE]