1. Neurosurg Focus. 2011 Mar;30(3):E9. doi: 10.3171/2011.1.FOCUS10279.

Laminoplasty outcomes: is there a difference between patients with degenerative 
stenosis and those with ossification of the posterior longitudinal ligament?

Meyer SA(1), Wu JC, Mummaneni PV.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, University of California-San Francisco, 
CA, USA.

OBJECT: Two common causes of cervical myelopathy include degenerative stenosis 
and ossification of the posterior longitudinal ligament (OPLL). It has been 
postulated that patients with OPLL have more complications and worse outcomes 
than those with degenerative stenosis. The authors sought to compare the 
surgical results of laminoplasty in the treatment of cervical stenosis with 
myelopathy due to either degenerative changes or segmental OPLL.
METHODS: The authors conducted a retrospective review of 40 instrumented 
laminoplasty cases performed at a single institution over a 4-year period to 
treat cervical myelopathy without kyphosis. Twelve of these patients had 
degenerative cervical stenotic myelopathy ([CSM]; degenerative group), and the 
remaining 28 had segmental OPLL (OPLL group). The 2 groups had statistically 
similar demographic characteristics and number of treated levels (mean 3.9 
surgically treated levels; p > 0.05). The authors collected perioperative and 
follow-up data, including radiographic results.
RESULTS: The overall clinical follow-up rate was 88%, and the mean clinical 
follow-up duration was 16.4 months. The mean radiographic follow-up rate was 
83%, and the mean length of radiographic follow-up was 9.3 months. There were no 
significant differences in the estimated blood loss (EBL) or length of hospital 
stay (LOS) between the groups (p > 0.05). The mean EBL and LOS for the 
degenerative group were 206 ml and 3.7 days, respectively. The mean EBL and LOS 
for the OPLL group were 155 ml and 4 days, respectively. There was a 
statistically significant improvement of more than one grade in the Nurick score 
for both groups following surgery (p < 0.05). The Nurick score improvement was 
not statistically different between the groups (p > 0.05). The visual analog 
scale (VAS) neck pain scores were similar between groups pre- and 
postoperatively (p > 0.05). The complication rates were not statistically 
different between groups either (p > 0.05). Radiographically, both groups lost 
extension range of motion (ROM) following laminoplasty, but this change was not 
statistically significant (p > 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with CSM due to either degenerative disease or segmental 
OPLL have similar perioperative results and neurological outcomes with 
laminoplasty. The VAS neck pain scores did not improve significantly with 
laminoplasty for either group. Laminoplasty may limit extension ROM.

DOI: 10.3171/2011.1.FOCUS10279
PMID: 21361755 [Indexed for MEDLINE]