1. BMC Public Health. 2011 May 18;11:335. doi: 10.1186/1471-2458-11-335.

Canada's Compassionate Care Benefit: is it an adequate public health response to 
addressing the issue of caregiver burden in end-of-life care?

Williams AM(1), Eby JA, Crooks VA, Stajduhar K, Giesbrecht M, Vuksan M, Cohen 
SR, Brazil K, Allan D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Geography and Earth Sciences, McMaster University, Hamilton, 
Ontario, Canada.

BACKGROUND: An increasingly significant public health issue in Canada, and 
elsewhere throughout the developed world, pertains to the provision of adequate 
palliative/end-of-life (P/EOL) care. Informal caregivers who take on the 
responsibility of providing P/EOL care often experience negative physical, 
mental, emotional, social and economic consequences. In this article, we 
specifically examine how Canada's Compassionate Care Benefit (CCB)--a 
contributory benefits social program aimed at informal P/EOL 
caregivers--operates as a public health response in sustaining informal 
caregivers providing P/EOL care, and whether or not it adequately addresses 
known aspects of caregiver burden that are addressed within the population 
health promotion (PHP) model.
METHODS: As part of a national evaluation of Canada's Compassionate Care 
Benefit, 57 telephone interviews were conducted with Canadian informal P/EOL 
caregivers in 5 different provinces, pertaining to the strengths and weaknesses 
of the CCB and the general caregiving experience. Interview data was coded with 
Nvivo software and emerging themes were identified by the research team, with 
such findings published elsewhere. The purpose of the present analysis was 
identified after comparing the findings to the literature specific to caregiver 
burden and public health, after which data was analyzed using the PHP model as a 
guiding framework.
RESULTS: Informal caregivers spoke to several of the determinants of health 
outlined in the PHP model that are implicated in their burden experience: 
gender, income and social status, working conditions, health and social 
services, social support network, and personal health practises and coping 
strategies. They recognized the need for improving the CCB to better address 
these determinants.
CONCLUSIONS: This study, from the perspective of family caregivers, demonstrates 
that the CCB is not living up to its full potential in sustaining informal P/EOL 
caregivers. Effort is required to transform the CCB so that it may fulfill the 
potential it holds for serving as one public health response to caregiver burden 
that forms part of a healthy public policy that addresses the determinants of 
this burden.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2458-11-335
PMCID: PMC3123207
PMID: 21592383 [Indexed for MEDLINE]