1. JOP. 2011 Sep 9;12(5):445-57.

Spleen-preserving distal pancreatectomy with resection of the splenic vessels. 
Should one rely on the short gastric arteries?

Egorov VI(1), Yashina NI, Zhurenkova TV, Petukhova MV, Starostina NS, Zarinskaya 
SA, Dmitriyeva KA, Shevchenko TV, Petrov RV.

Author information:
(1)Department of Hepatopancreatobiliary Surgery, Vishnevsky Institute of 
Surgery, Moscow, Russia. v.egorov61@gmail.com

CONTEXT: Knowing the collaterals is essential for a spleen-preserving distal 
pancreatectomy with resection of the splenic vessels.
OBJECTIVE: To ascertain the sources of the blood supply to the spleen after a 
spleen-preserving distal pancreatectomy with resection of the splenic vessels.
METHODS: Perfusion of the cadaveric left gastric and right gastroepiploic 
arteries with methylene blue after occlusion of all the arteries except the 
short gastric arteries (n=10). Intraoperative color Doppler ultrasound was used 
for the evaluation of the hilar arterial blood flow at distal pancreatectomy 
(n=23) after 1) clamping of the splenic artery alone, 2) clamping of the splenic 
and left gastroepiploic arteries and 3) clamping of the splenic and short 
gastric arteries. CT angiography of the gastric and splenic vessels before and 
after a spleen-preserving distal pancreatectomy (n=10).
RESULTS: Perfusion of the cadaveric arteries revealed no effective direct or 
indirect (through the submucous gastric arterial network) communication between 
the left gastric and the branches of the short gastric arteries. In no case did 
intraoperative color Doppler ultrasound detect any hilar arterial blood flow 
after the clamping of the splenic and left gastroepiploic arteries. The clamping 
of the short gastric arteries did not change the flow parameters. In none of the 
cases did a post-spleen-preserving distal pancreatectomy with resection of the 
splenic vessels CT angiography delineate the short gastric vessels supplying the 
spleen. In all cases, the gastroepiploic arcade was the main arterial pathway 
feeding the spleen.
CONCLUSION: Experimental, intra- and postoperative instrumental investigations 
did not show the short gastric arteries to be engaged in the blood supply to the 
spleen after a spleen-preserving distal pancreatectomy with resection of the 
splenic vessels. In all cases, the left gastroepiploic artery was the main 
collateral vessel.

PMID: 21904069 [Indexed for MEDLINE]