1. BMC Public Health. 2011 Sep 13;11:699. doi: 10.1186/1471-2458-11-699.

Health care for immigrants in Europe: is there still consensus among country 
experts about principles of good practice? A Delphi study.

Devillé W(1), Greacen T, Bogic M, Dauvrin M, Dias S, Gaddini A, Jensen NK, 
Karamanidou C, Kluge U, Mertaniemi R, Riera RP, Sárváry A, Soares JJ, Stankunas 
M, Strassmayr C, Welbel M, Priebe S.

Author information:
(1)International and Migrant Health, Netherlands Institute for Health Services 
Research, Otterstraat 118-124, 3500 BN Utrecht, the Netherlands. 
w.deville@nivel.nl

BACKGROUND: European Member States are facing a challenge to provide accessible 
and effective health care services for immigrants. It remains unclear how best 
to achieve this and what characterises good practice in increasingly 
multicultural societies across Europe. This study assessed the views and values 
of professionals working in different health care contexts and in different 
European countries as to what constitutes good practice in health care for 
immigrants.
METHODS: A total of 134 experts in 16 EU Member States participated in a 
three-round Delphi process. The experts represented four different fields: 
academia, Non-Governmental Organisations, policy-making and health care 
practice. For each country, the process aimed to produce a national consensus 
list of the most important factors characterising good practice in health care 
for migrants.
RESULTS: The scoring procedures resulted in 10 to 16 factors being identified as 
the most important for each participating country. All 186 factors were 
aggregated into 9 themes: (1) easy and equal access to health care, (2) 
empowerment of migrants, (3) culturally sensitive health care services, (4) 
quality of care, (5) patient/health care provider communication, (6) respect 
towards migrants, (7) networking in and outside health services, (8) targeted 
outreach activities, and (9) availability of data about specificities in migrant 
health care and prevention. Although local political debate, level of 
immigration and the nature of local health care systems influenced the selection 
and rating of factors within each country, there was a broad European consensus 
on most factors. Yet, discordance remained both within countries, e.g. on the 
need for prioritising cultural differences, and between countries, e.g. on the 
need for more consistent governance of health care services for immigrants.
CONCLUSIONS: Experts across Europe asserted the right to culturally sensitive 
health care for all immigrants. There is a broad consensus among experts about 
the major principles of good practice that need to be implemented across Europe. 
However, there also is some disagreement both within and between countries on 
specific issues that require further research and debate.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2458-11-699
PMCID: PMC3182934
PMID: 21914194 [Indexed for MEDLINE]