1. Surg Endosc. 2012 Mar;26(3):853-61. doi: 10.1007/s00464-011-1966-9. Epub 2011 
Oct 20.

Does a preoperative medically supervised weight loss program improve bariatric 
surgery outcomes? A pilot randomized study.

Parikh M(1), Dasari M, McMacken M, Ren C, Fielding G, Ogedegbe G.

Author information:
(1)Bellevue Center for Obesity and Weight Management, Bellevue Hospital Center, 
Department of Surgery, New York University School of Medicine, New Bellevue 15 
South 7, 550 First Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA. manish.parikh@nyumc.org

BACKGROUND: Many insurance payors mandate that bariatric surgery candidates 
undergo a medically supervised weight management (MSWM) program as a 
prerequisite for surgery. However, there is little evidence to support this 
requirement. We evaluated in a randomized controlled trial the hypothesis that 
participation in a MSWM program does not predict outcomes after laparoscopic 
adjustable gastric banding (LAGB) in a publicly insured population.
METHODS: This pilot randomized trial was conducted in a large academic urban 
public hospital. Patients who met NIH consensus criteria for bariatric surgery 
and whose insurance did not require a mandatory 6-month MSWM program were 
randomized to a MSWM program with monthly visits over 6 months (individual or 
group) or usual care for 6 months and then followed for bariatric surgery 
outcomes postoperatively. Demographics, weight, and patient behavior scores, 
including patient adherence, eating behavior, patient activation, and physical 
activity, were collected at baseline and at 6 months (immediately preoperatively 
and postoperatively).
RESULTS: A total of 55 patients were enrolled in the study with complete 
follow-up on 23 patients. Participants randomized to a MSWM program attended an 
average of 2 sessions preoperatively. The majority of participants were female 
and non-Caucasian, mean age was 46 years, average income was less than 
$20,000/year, and most had Medicaid as their primary insurer, consistent with 
the demographics of the hospital's bariatric surgery program. Data analysis 
included both intention-to-treat and completers' analyses. No significant 
differences in weight loss and most patient behaviors were found between the two 
groups postoperatively, suggesting that participation in a MSWM program did not 
improve weight loss outcomes for LAGB. Participation in a MSWM program did 
appear to have a positive effect on physical activity postoperatively.
CONCLUSION: MSWM does not appear to confer additional benefit as compared to the 
standard preoperative bariatric surgery protocol in terms of weight loss and 
most behavioral outcomes after LAGB in our patient population.

DOI: 10.1007/s00464-011-1966-9
PMID: 22011946 [Indexed for MEDLINE]