1. World J Surg Oncol. 2012 Feb 20;10:44. doi: 10.1186/1477-7819-10-44.

Does partial expander deflation exacerbate the adverse effects of radiotherapy 
in two-stage breast reconstruction?

Celet Ozden B(1), Guven E, Aslay I, Kemikler G, Olgac V, Soluk Tekkesin M, 
Serarslan B, Tumerdem Ulug B, Bilgin Karabulut A, Arinci A, Emekli U.

Author information:
(1)Istanbul University, Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Department of Plastic, 
Reconstructive and Aesthetic Surgery, Istanbul, Turkey. beletzden@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: The optimum protocol for expander volume adjustment with respect to 
the timing and application of radiotherapy remains controversial.
METHODS: Eighteen New Zealand rabbits were divided into three groups. Metallic 
port integrated anatomic breast expanders of 250 cc were implanted on the back 
of each animal and controlled expansion was performed. Group I underwent 
radiotherapy with full expanders while in Group II, expanders were partially 
deflated immediately prior to radiotherapy. Control group did not receive 
radiotherapy.The changes in blood flow at different volume adjustments were 
investigated in Group II by laser Doppler flowmetry. Variations in the 
histopathologic properties of the irradiated tissues including the skin, capsule 
and the pocket floor, were compared in the biopsy specimens taken from different 
locations in each group.
RESULTS: A significant increase in skin blood flow was detected in Group II with 
partial expander deflation. Overall, histopathologic exam revealed aggravated 
findings of chronic radiodermatitis (epidermal atrophy, dermal inflammation and 
fibrosis, neovascularisation and vascular changes as well as increased capsule 
thickness) especially around the lower expander pole, in Group II.
CONCLUSIONS: Expander deflation immediately prior to radiotherapy, may augment 
the adverse effects, especially in the lower expander pole, possibly via 
enhanced radiosensitization due to a relative increase in the blood flow and 
tissue oxygenation.

DOI: 10.1186/1477-7819-10-44
PMCID: PMC3315407
PMID: 22348433 [Indexed for MEDLINE]