1. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e39260. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0039260. Epub 2012 Jun
15.

Does insulin resistance drive the association between hyperglycemia and 
cardiovascular risk?

Færch K(1), Bergman B, Perreault L.

Author information:
(1)Steno Diabetes Center, Gentofte, Denmark. krif@steno.dk

BACKGROUND: Several studies have shown associations between hyperglycemia and 
risk of cardiovascular disease (CVD) and mortality, yet glucose-lowering 
treatment does little to mitigate this risk. We examined whether associations 
between hyperglycemia and CVD risk were explained by underlying insulin 
resistance.
METHODS: In 60 middle-aged individuals without diabetes we studied the 
associations of fasting plasma glucose, 2-hour post oral glucose tolerance test 
plasma glucose, insulin sensitivity as well as body fat percentage with CVD 
risk. Insulin sensitivity was measured as the glucose infusion rate during a 
euglycemic hyperinsulinemic clamp, body fat percentage was measured by dual 
X-ray absorptiometry, and CVD risk was estimated using the Framingham risk 
score. Associations of fasting plasma glucose, 2-hour plasma glucose, insulin 
sensitivity and body fat percentage with the Framingham risk score were assessed 
in linear regression models.
RESULTS: Both fasting and 2-hour plasma glucose levels were associated with 
higher Framingham risk score (fasting glucose: r(2) = 0.21; 2-hour glucose: r(2) 
= 0.24; P<0.001 for both), and insulin sensitivity with lower Framingham risk 
score (r(2) = 0.36; P<0.001). However, adjustment for insulin sensitivity and 
2-hour glucose made the effect of fasting glucose non-significant (P = 0.060). 
Likewise, when adjusting for insulin sensitivity and fasting glucose, the 
association between 2-hour glucose and Framingham risk score disappeared (P = 
0.143). In contrast, insulin sensitivity was still associated with Framingham 
risk score after adjusting for glucose levels (P<0.001). Body fat was not 
associated with Framingham risk score when taking insulin sensitivity into 
account (P = 0.550).
CONCLUSION: The association between plasma glucose levels and CVD risk is mainly 
explained by insulin resistance, which raises the question of whether glucose 
lowering per se without changes in the processes that underlie hyperglycemia 
should be the sole clinical paradigm in the treatment of type 2 diabetes or its 
prevention.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0039260
PMCID: PMC3376119
PMID: 22720085 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have read the 
journal's policy and have the following conflicts: KF is employed by Steno 
Diabetes Center A/S, a research hospital working in the Danish National Health 
Service and which is owned by Novo Nordisk A/S. Steno Diabetes Center A/S 
receives part of its core funding from unrestricted grants from the Novo Nordisk 
Foundation and Novo Nordisk A/S. K.F. owns shares in Novo Nordisk A/S. No other 
potential conflicts of interest relevant to this article were reported. This 
does not alter the authors' adherence to all the PLoS ONE policies on sharing 
data and materials.