1. J Pediatr Orthop. 2012 Oct-Nov;32(7):675-81. doi:
10.1097/BPO.0b013e318269c459.

Type II supracondylar humerus fractures: can some be treated nonoperatively?

Spencer HT(1), Dorey FJ, Zionts LE, Dichter DH, Wong MA, Moazzaz P, Silva M.

Author information:
(1)UCLA Orthopaedic Hospital Department of Orthopaedics, David Geffen School of 
Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

BACKGROUND: The range of injury severity that can be seen within the category of 
type II supracondylar humerus fractures (SCHFs) raises the question whether some 
could be treated nonoperatively. However, the clinical difficulty in using this 
approach lies in determining which type II SCHFs can be managed successfully 
without a surgical intervention.
METHODS: We reviewed clinical and radiographic information on 259 pediatric type 
II SCHFs that were enrolled in a prospective registry of elbow fractures. The 
characteristics of the patients who were treated without surgery were compared 
with those of patients who were treated surgically. Treatment outcomes, as 
assessed by the final clinical and radiographic alignment, range of motion of 
the elbow, and complications, were compared between the groups to define 
clinical and radiographic features that related to success or failure of 
nonoperative management.
RESULTS: During the course of treatment, 39 fractures were found to have 
unsatisfactory alignment with nonoperative management and were taken for 
surgery. Ultimately, 150 fractures (57.9%) were treated nonoperatively, and 109 
fractures (42.1%) were treated surgically. At final follow-up, outcome measures 
of change in carrying angle, range of motion, and complications did not show 
clinically significant differences between treatment groups. Fractures without 
rotational deformity or coronal angulation and with a shaft-condylar angle of 
>15 degrees were more likely to be associated with successful nonsurgical 
treatment. A scoring system was developed using these features to stratify the 
severity of the injury. Patients with isolated extension deformity, but none of 
the other features, were more likely to complete successful nonoperative 
management.
CONCLUSIONS: This study suggests that some of the less severe pediatric type II 
SCHFs can be successfully treated without surgery if close follow-up is 
achieved. Fractures with initial rotational deformity, coronal malalignment, and 
significant extension of the distal fragment are likely to fail a nonoperative 
approach. An algorithm using the initial radiographic characteristics can aid in 
distinguishing groups.

DOI: 10.1097/BPO.0b013e318269c459
PMID: 22955530 [Indexed for MEDLINE]