1. J Couns Psychol. 2013 Jan;60(1):31-41. doi: 10.1037/a0031294.

Uniformity of evidence-based treatments in practice? Therapist effects in the 
delivery of cognitive processing therapy for PTSD.

Laska KM(1), Smith TL(2), Wislocki AP(3), Minami T(3), Wampold BE(3).

Author information:
(1)Bedford VA Medical Center.
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Baylor College of Medicine.
(3)Department of Counseling Psychology, School of Education, University of 
Wisconsin-Madison.

OBJECTIVE: Various factors contribute to the effective implementation of 
evidence-based treatments (EBTs). In this study, cognitive processing therapy 
(CPT) was administered in a Veterans Affairs (VA) posttraumatic stress disorder 
(PTSD) specialty clinic in which training and supervision were provided 
following VA implementation guidelines. The aim was to (a) estimate the 
proportion of variability in outcome attributable to therapists and (b) identify 
characteristics of those therapists who produced better outcomes.
METHOD: We used an archival database of veterans (n = 192) who completed 12 
sessions of CPT by therapists (n = 25) who were trained by 2 nationally 
recognized trainers, 1 of whom also provided weekly group supervision. 
Multilevel modeling was used to estimate therapist effects, with therapists 
treated as a random factor. The supervisor was asked to retrospectively rate 
each therapist in terms of perceived effectiveness based on supervision 
interactions. Using single case study design, the supervisor was interviewed to 
determine what criteria she used to rate the therapists and emerging themes were 
coded.
RESULTS: When initial level of severity on the PTSD Checklist (PCL; McDonald & 
Calhoun, 2010; Weathers, Litz, Herman, Huska, & Keane, 1993) was taken into 
account, approximately 12% of the variability in the PCL at the end of treatment 
was due to therapists. The trainer, blind to the results, identified the 
following characteristics and actions of effective therapists: effectively 
addressing patient avoidance, language used in supervision, flexible 
interpersonal style, and ability to develop a strong therapeutic alliance.
CONCLUSIONS: This study adds to the growing body of literature documenting the 
importance of the individual therapist as an important factor in the change 
process.

PsycINFO Database Record (c) 2013 APA, all rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1037/a0031294
PMID: 23356465 [Indexed for MEDLINE]