1. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2013 Jul;37(7):1204-12. doi: 10.1111/acer.12072. Epub
2013  Feb 15.

Does binge drinking during early pregnancy increase the risk of psychomotor 
deficits?

Kesmodel US(1), Bay B, Wimberley T, Eriksen HL, Mortensen EL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology (USK), Aarhus University Hospital, 
Aarhus, Denmark. ukes@soci.au.dk

BACKGROUND: The potential effects of binge drinking during pregnancy on child 
motor function have only been assessed in a few, small studies. We aimed to 
examine the effects of binge alcohol consumption during early pregnancy, 
including number of binge episodes and timing of binge drinking, on child motor 
function at age 5.
METHODS: We performed a prospective follow-up study of 678 women and their 
children sampled from the Danish National Birth Cohort based on maternal alcohol 
consumption during pregnancy. At 5 years of age, the children were tested with 
the Movement Assessment Battery for Children. Parental education, maternal IQ, 
prenatal maternal smoking, the child's age at testing, sex of child, and tester 
were considered core confounders, while the full model also controlled for 
prenatal maternal average alcohol intake, maternal age and prepregnancy body 
mass index, parity, home environment, postnatal parental smoking, health status, 
participation in organized sport, and indicators for hearing and vision 
impairment.
RESULTS: There were no systematic or significant differences in motor function 
between children of mothers reporting isolated episodes of binge drinking and 
children of mothers with no binge episodes. No association was observed with 
respect to the number of binge episodes (maximum of 12) and timing of binge 
drinking.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, we found no systematic association between isolated 
episodes of binge drinking during early pregnancy and child motor function at 
age 5.

Copyright © 2013 by the Research Society on Alcoholism.

DOI: 10.1111/acer.12072
PMID: 23414523 [Indexed for MEDLINE]