1. Musculoskeletal Care. 2014 Mar;12(1):34-46. doi: 10.1002/msc.1048. Epub 2013
Mar  13.

The colour of pain: can patients use colour to describe osteoarthritis pain?

Wylde V(1), Wells V, Dixon S, Gooberman-Hill R.

Author information:
(1)Musculoskeletal Research Unit, School of Clinical Sciences, University of 
Bristol, Southmead Hospital, Bristol, UK.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of the present study was to explore patients' views on the 
acceptability and feasibility of using colour to describe osteoarthritis (OA) 
pain, and whether colour could be used to communicate pain to healthcare 
professionals.
METHODS: Six group interviews were conducted with 17 patients with knee OA. 
Discussion topics included first impressions about using colour to describe 
pain, whether participants could associate their pain with colour, how colours 
related to changes to intensity and different pain qualities, and whether they 
could envisage using colour to describe pain to healthcare professionals.
RESULTS: The group interviews indicated that, although the idea of using colour 
was generally acceptable, it did not suit all participants as a way of 
describing their pain. The majority of participants chose red to describe 
high-intensity pain; the reasons given were because red symbolized inflammation, 
fire, anger and the stop signal in a traffic light system. Colours used to 
describe the absence of pain were chosen because of their association with 
positive emotional feelings, such as purity, calmness and happiness. A range of 
colours was chosen to represent changes in pain intensity. Aching pain was 
consistently identified as being associated with colours such as grey or black, 
whereas sharp pain was described using a wider selection of colours. The 
majority of participants thought that they would be able to use colour to 
describe their pain to healthcare professionals, although issues around the 
interpretability and standardization of colour were raised.
CONCLUSIONS: For some patients, using colour to describe their pain experience 
may be a useful tool to improve doctor-patient communication.

Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/msc.1048
PMID: 23495128 [Indexed for MEDLINE]