1. Eur J Radiol. 2013 Aug;82(8):1201-6. doi: 10.1016/j.ejrad.2013.02.020. Epub
2013  Apr 17.

Pitfalls in urinary stone identification using CT attenuation values: are we 
getting the same information on different scanner models?

Grosjean R(1), Daudon M, Chammas MF Jr, Claudon M, Eschwege P, Felblinger J, 
Hubert J.

Author information:
(1)IADI Laboratory, INSERM-U947, Nancy-University, Allée du Morvan, 54500 
Vandoeuvre-les-Nancy, France. r.grosjean@chu-nancy.fr

INTRODUCTION: Evaluate the capability of different Computed Tomography scanners 
to determine urinary stone compositions based on CT attenuation values and to 
evaluate potential differences between each model.
METHODS: 241 human urinary stones were obtained and their biochemical 
composition determined. Four different CT scanners (Siemens, Philips, GEMS and 
Toshiba) were evaluated. Mean CT-attenuation values and the standard deviation 
were recorded separately and compared with a t-paired test.
RESULTS: For all tested CT scanners, when the classification of the various 
types of stones was arranged according to the mean CT-attenuation values and to 
the confidence interval, large overlappings between stone types were 
highlighted. The t-paired test showed that most stone types could not be 
identified. Some types of stones presented mean CT attenuation values 
significantly different from one CT scanner to another. At 80kV, the mean CT 
attenuation values obtained with the Toshiba Aquilion were significantly 
different from those obtained with the Siemens Sensation. On the other hand, 
mean values obtained with the Philips Brilliance were all significantly equal to 
those obtained with the Siemens Sensation and with the Toshiba Aquilion. At 
120kV mean CT attenuation values of uric acid, cystine and struvite stones 
obtained with the Philips model are significantly different from those obtained 
with the Siemens and the Toshiba but equal to those obtained with the GE 64.
CONCLUSIONS: According to our study, there is a great variability when different 
brands and models of scanners are compared directly. Furthermore, the CT scan 
analysis and HU evaluation appears to gather insufficient information in order 
to characterize and identify the composition of renal stones.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejrad.2013.02.020
PMID: 23601294 [Indexed for MEDLINE]