1. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2014 May;147(5):1499-504. doi: 
10.1016/j.jtcvs.2013.05.018. Epub 2013 Jul 16.

Are intraoperative precursor events associated with postoperative major adverse 
events?

Herman CR(1), Légaré JF(2), Levy A(3), Buth KJ(2), Baskett R(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiac Surgery, Dallhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, 
Canada; Department of Community Health and Epidemiology, Dallhousie University, 
Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada. Electronic address: cherman@dal.ca.
(2)Division of Cardiac Surgery, Dallhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, 
Canada.
(3)Department of Community Health and Epidemiology, Dallhousie University, 
Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.

OBJECTIVES: Precursor events are undesirable events that can lead to a 
subsequent adverse event and have been associated with postoperative mortality. 
The purpose of the present study was to determine whether precursor events are 
associated with a composite endpoint of major adverse cardiac events (MACE) 
(death, acute renal failure, stroke, infection) in a low- to medium-risk 
coronary artery bypass grafting, valve, and valve plus coronary artery bypass 
grafting population. These events might be targets for strategies aimed at 
quality improvement.
METHODS: The present study was a retrospective cohort design performed at the 
Queen Elizabeth Health Science Centre. Low- to medium-risk patients who had 
experienced postoperative MACE were matched 1:1 with patients who had not 
experienced postoperative MACE. The operative notes, for both groups, were 
scored by 5 surgeons to determine the frequency of 4 precursor events: bleeding, 
difficulty weaning from cardiopulmonary bypass, repair or regrafting, and 
incomplete revascularization or repair. A univariate comparison of ≥1 precursor 
events in the matched groups was performed.
RESULTS: A total of 311 MACE patients (98.4%) were matched. The primary outcome 
occurred more frequently in the MACE group than in the non-MACE group (33% vs 
24%; P = .015). The incidence of the individual events of bleeding and 
difficulty weaning from cardiopulmonary bypass was significantly higher in the 
MACE group. Those patients with a precursor event in the absence of MACE also 
appeared to have a greater prevalence of other important postoperative outcomes.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients undergoing cardiac surgery who are exposed to 
intraoperative precursor events were more likely to experience a postoperative 
MACE. Quality improvement techniques aimed at mitigating the consequences of 
precursor events might improve the surgical outcomes for cardiac surgical 
patients.

Crown Copyright © 2014. Published by Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jtcvs.2013.05.018
PMID: 23870157 [Indexed for MEDLINE]