1. Am J Disaster Med. 2013 Spring;8(2):91-6. doi: 10.5055/ajdm.2013.0115.

Is portable ultrasonography accurate in the evaluation of Schanz pin placement 
during extremity fracture fixation in austere environments?

Dahl BP(1), Pemberton AJ(1), Beck RT(1), Cetindag B(2), Wohltmann CD(2), 
McAndrew M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Division of Orthopaedics and Rehabilitation, Southern 
Illinois University School of Medicine, Springfield, Illinois.
(2)Department of Surgery, Division of General Surgery, Southern Illinois 
University School of Medicine, Springfield, Illinois.

OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to investigate the efficacy of 
ultrasonography to confirm Schanz pin placement in a cadaveric model, and the 
interobserver repeatability of the ultrasound methodology.
DESIGN: This investigation is a repeated measures cadaveric study with multiple 
examiners.
PARTICIPANTS: Cadaveric preparation and observations were done by an orthopaedic 
traumatologist and resident, and two general surgery traumatologists.
INTERVENTIONS: A total of 16 Schanz pins were equally placed in bilateral femora 
and tibiae. Four examiners took measurements of pin protrusion beyond the distal 
cortices using first ultrasonography and then by direct measurement after gross 
dissection.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Distal Schanz pin protrusion length measurements from 
both ultrasonography and direct measurement post dissection.
RESULTS: Schanz pin protrusion measurements are underestimated by 
ultrasonography (p < 0.01) by an average of 10 percent over the range of 5 to 18 
mm, and they display a proportional bias that increases the under reporting as 
the magnitude of pin protrusion increases. Ultrasound data demonstrate good 
linear correlation and closely represent actual protrusion values in the 5 to 12 
mm range. Interobserver repeatability analysis demonstrated that all examiners 
were not statistically different in their measurements despite minimal 
familiarity with the ultrasound methodology (p > 0.8).
CONCLUSIONS: Despite the statistical imparity of pin protrusion measurement via 
ultrasound compared to that of gross dissection, a consideration of the clinical 
relevance of ultrasound measurement bias during an austere operating theatre 
leads to the conclusion that ultrasonography is an adequate methodology for 
Schanz pin protrusion measurement.

DOI: 10.5055/ajdm.2013.0115
PMID: 24352924 [Indexed for MEDLINE]