1. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2014 Mar;22(3):415-30. doi: 
10.1016/j.joca.2014.01.005. Epub 2014 Jan 31.

Pharmacologic regimens for knee osteoarthritis prevention: can they be 
cost-effective?

Losina E(1), Burbine SA(2), Suter LG(3), Hunter DJ(4), Solomon DH(5), Daigle 
ME(6), Dervan EE(7), Jordan JM(8), Katz JN(9).

Author information:
(1)Orthopaedic and Arthritis Center for Outcomes Research, Department of 
Orthopaedic Surgery, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA; Section of 
Clinical Sciences, Division of Rheumatology, Immunology and Allergy, Brigham and 
Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA; Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA; 
Boston University School of Public Health, Boston, MA, USA. Electronic address: 
elosina@partners.org.
(2)Orthopaedic and Arthritis Center for Outcomes Research, Department of 
Orthopaedic Surgery, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. Electronic 
address: sara.burbine@gmail.com.
(3)Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA. Electronic address: lisa.suter@yale.edu.
(4)University of Sydney and Royal North Shore Hospital, Sydney, Australia. 
Electronic address: david.hunter@sydney.edu.au.
(5)Section of Clinical Sciences, Division of Rheumatology, Immunology and 
Allergy, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA; Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA, USA. Electronic address: dsolomon@partners.org.
(6)Orthopaedic and Arthritis Center for Outcomes Research, Department of 
Orthopaedic Surgery, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. Electronic 
address: m.e.daigle@gmail.com.
(7)Orthopaedic and Arthritis Center for Outcomes Research, Department of 
Orthopaedic Surgery, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. Electronic 
address: edervan@partners.org.
(8)Thurston Arthritis Research Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel 
Hill, NC, USA. Electronic address: joanne_jordan@med.unc.edu.
(9)Orthopaedic and Arthritis Center for Outcomes Research, Department of 
Orthopaedic Surgery, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA; Section of 
Clinical Sciences, Division of Rheumatology, Immunology and Allergy, Brigham and 
Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA; Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. 
Electronic address: jnkatz@partners.org.

OBJECTIVE: We sought to determine the target populations and drug efficacy, 
toxicity, cost, and initiation age thresholds under which a pharmacologic 
regimen for knee osteoarthritis (OA) prevention could be cost-effective.
DESIGN: We used the Osteoarthritis Policy (OAPol) Model, a validated 
state-transition simulation model of knee OA, to evaluate the cost-effectiveness 
of using disease-modifying OA drugs (DMOADs) as prophylaxis for the disease. We 
assessed four cohorts at varying risk for developing OA: (1) no risk factors, 
(2) obese, (3) history of knee injury, and (4) high-risk (obese with history of 
knee injury). The base case DMOAD was initiated at age 50 with 40% efficacy in 
the first year, 5% failure per subsequent year, 0.22% major toxicity, and annual 
cost of $1,000. Outcomes included costs, quality-adjusted life expectancy 
(QALE), and incremental cost-effectiveness ratios (ICERs). Key parameters were 
varied in sensitivity analyses.
RESULTS: For the high-risk cohort, base case prophylaxis increased 
quality-adjusted life-years (QALYs) by 0.04 and lifetime costs by $4,600, and 
produced an ICER of $118,000 per QALY gained. ICERs >$150,000/QALY were observed 
when comparing the base case DMOAD to the standard of care in the knee injury 
only cohort; for the obese only and no risk factors cohorts, the base case DMOAD 
was less cost-effective than the standard of care. Regimens priced at $3,000 per 
year and higher demonstrated ICERs above cost-effectiveness thresholds 
consistent with current US standards.
CONCLUSIONS: The cost-effectiveness of DMOADs for OA prevention for persons at 
high risk for incident OA may be comparable to other accepted preventive 
therapies.

Copyright © 2014 Osteoarthritis Research Society International. Published by 
Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.joca.2014.01.005
PMCID: PMC4006219
PMID: 24487044 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST The authors do not have any 
conflict of interest with respect to the content of this paper.