1. Acad Radiol. 2014 Mar;21(3):345-54. doi: 10.1016/j.acra.2013.11.011.

Can shape analysis differentiate free-floating internal carotid artery thrombus 
from atherosclerotic plaque in patients evaluated with CTA for stroke or 
transient ischemic attack?

Thornhill RE(1), Lum C(2), Jaberi A(3), Stefanski P(3), Torres CH(2), Momoli 
F(4), Petrcich W(5), Dowlatshahi D(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada; 
Department of Medical Imaging, The Ottawa Hospital, 1053 Carling Ave, Ottawa, 
Ontario K1Y 4E9, Canada; Clinical Epidemiology Program/Methods Centre, Ottawa 
Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. Electronic address: 
rthornhi@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Radiology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada; 
Department of Medical Imaging, The Ottawa Hospital, 1053 Carling Ave, Ottawa, 
Ontario K1Y 4E9, Canada; Clinical Epidemiology Program/Methods Centre, Ottawa 
Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
(3)Department of Radiology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada; 
Department of Medical Imaging, The Ottawa Hospital, 1053 Carling Ave, Ottawa, 
Ontario K1Y 4E9, Canada.
(4)Clinical Epidemiology Program/Methods Centre, Ottawa Hospital Research 
Institute, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada; Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario 
Research Institute, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
(5)Clinical Epidemiology Program/Methods Centre, Ottawa Hospital Research 
Institute, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
(6)Clinical Epidemiology Program/Methods Centre, Ottawa Hospital Research 
Institute, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada; Division of Neurology, Department of 
Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

RATIONALE AND OBJECTIVES: Patients presenting with transient ischemic attack or 
stroke may have symptom-related lesions on acute computed tomography angiography 
(CTA) such as free-floating intraluminal thrombus (FFT). It is difficult to 
distinguish FFT from carotid plaque, but the distinction is critical as 
management differs. By contouring the shape of these vascular lesions ("virtual 
endarterectomy"), advanced morphometric analysis can be performed. The objective 
of our study is to determine whether quantitative shape analysis can accurately 
differentiate FFT from atherosclerotic plaque.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We collected 23 consecutive cases of suspected carotid 
FFT seen on CTA (13 men, 65 ± 10 years; 10 women, 65.5 ± 8.8 years). 
True-positive FFT cases (FFT+) were defined as filling defects resolving with 
anticoagulant therapy versus false-positives (FFT-), which remained unchanged. 
Lesion volumes were extracted from CTA images and quantitative shape descriptors 
were computed. The five most discriminative features were used to construct 
receiver operator characteristic (ROC) curves and to generate three 
machine-learning classifiers. Average classification accuracy was determined by 
cross-validation.
RESULTS: Follow-up imaging confirmed sixteen FFT+ and seven FFT- cases. Five 
shape descriptors delineated FFT+ from FFT- cases. The logistic regression model 
produced from combining all five shape features demonstrated a sensitivity of 
87.5% and a specificity of 71.4% with an area under the ROC curve = 0.85 ± 0.09. 
Average accuracy for each classifier ranged from 65.2%-76.4%.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified five quantitative shape descriptors of carotid FFT. 
This shape "signature" shows potential for supplementing conventional lesion 
characterization in cases of suspected FFT.

Copyright © 2014 AUR. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.acra.2013.11.011
PMID: 24507422 [Indexed for MEDLINE]