1. Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc. 2015 Jul;23(7):2012-8. doi: 
10.1007/s00167-014-2879-7. Epub 2014 Feb 12.

Does patella position influence ligament balancing in total knee arthroplasty?

Yoon JR(1), Oh KJ, Wang JH, Yang JH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Veterans Health Service Medical Center, 
6-2 Dunchon Dong, Kangdong Ku, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

PURPOSE: In vivo comparative gap measurements were performed in three different 
patella positions (reduced, subluxated and everted) using 
offset-type-force-controlled-spreader-system.
METHODS: Prospectively, 50 knees were operated by total knee arthroplasty using 
a navigation-assisted gap-balancing technique. The 
offset-type-force-controlled-spreader-system was used for gap measurements. This 
commercially available instrument allows controllable tension in patella-reduced 
position. The mediolateral gaps of knee extension (0°) and flexion (90°) angle 
were recorded in three different patella positions; reduced, subluxated and 
everted. Any gap differences of more than 3 mm were considered as a meaningful 
difference. Correlation between the difference with the demographic data, 
preoperative radiologic alignment and intraoperative data was analysed. For 
statistical analysis, ANOVA and Pearson's correlation test were used.
RESULTS: The gaps in patella eversion demonstrated smaller gaps both in knee 
extension and flexion position compared to the gaps of patella reduction 
position. The amount of decreased gaps was more definite in knee flexion 
position. Statistically significant difference was observed for the lateral gap 
of patella eversion compared to gap of patella reduction in knee flexion 
position (p < 0.05). There were notable cases of variability in knee flexion 
position. Significant portion of 12 (24 %) knees of patella subluxation and 33 
(66 %) knees of patella evertion demonstrated either increased or decreased gaps 
in knee flexion position compared to the gaps of patella reduction position.
CONCLUSION: The gaps in patella eversion demonstrated smaller gaps both in knee 
extension and flexion position compared to the gaps of patella reduction 
position. The amount of decreased gaps was more definite in knee flexion 
position. Therefore, the intraoperative patellar positioning has influence on 
the measurement of the joint gap. Keeping the patella in reduced position is 
important during gap balancing.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: I.

DOI: 10.1007/s00167-014-2879-7
PMID: 24519615 [Indexed for MEDLINE]