1. J Neurosurg Sci. 2014 Mar;58(1):23-7.

Is lumbar drainage of postoperative cerebrospinal fluid fistula after spine 
surgery effective?

Barbanti Bròdano G(1), Serchi E, Babbi L, Terzi S, Corghi A, Gasbarrini A, 
Bandiera S, Griffoni C, Colangeli S, Ghermandi R, Boriani S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncologic and Degenerative Spine Surgery Rizzoli Orthopedic 
Institute, Bologna, Italy2 Department of Neurosurgery Bellaria‑Maggiore 
Hospital, Bologna, Italy3 Orthopedics and Traumatology Division Reggio Emilia 
Hospital, Reggio Emilia, Italy - giovanni@barbantibrodano.com.

AIM: This study is a retrospective consecutive case series analysis of 198 
patients who underwent spine surgery between 2009 and 2010. The aim of this 
paper was to assess the efficacy and safeness of bed rest and lumbar drainage in 
treating postoperative CSF fistula. Postoperative cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) 
fistula is a well-known complication in spine surgery which lead to a 
significant change in length of hospitalization and possible postoperative 
complications. Management of CSF leaks has changed little over the past 20 years 
with no golden standard advocated from literature.
METHODS: Postoperative CSF fistulas were described in 16 of 198 patients (8%) 
who underwent spine surgery between 2009 and 2010. The choice of the therapeutic 
strategy was based on the clinical condition of the patients, taking into 
account the possibility to maintain the prone position continuously and the risk 
of morbidity due to prolonged bed rest. Six patients were treated conservatively 
(position prone for three weeks), ten patients were treated by positioning an 
external CSF lumbar drainage for ten days. The mean follow-up period was ten 
months.
RESULTS: All patients healed their wound properly and no adverse events were 
recorded. Patients treated conservatively were cured in a mean period of 30 
days, while patients treated with CSF drainage were cured in a mean period of 10 
days.
CONCLUSION: Lumbar drainage seems to be effective and safe both in preventing 
CSF fistula in cases of large dural tears and debilitated/irradiated patients 
and in treating CSF leaks.

PMID: 24614789 [Indexed for MEDLINE]