1. Injury. 2014 Jul;45(7):1091-4. doi: 10.1016/j.injury.2014.01.024. Epub 2014
Jan  30.

Comparing femoral version after intramedullary nailing performed by 
trauma-trained and non-trauma trained surgeons: is there a difference?

Ayalon OB(1), Patel NM(1), Yoon RS(1), Donegan DJ(2), Koerner JD(3), Liporace 
FA(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Orthopaedic Trauma, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, NYU 
Hospital for Joint Diseases, New York, NY.
(2)Division of Orthopaedic Trauma, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Hospital 
of the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA.
(3)Division of Spine Surgery, Thomas Jefferson University Medical Center, 
Philadelphia, PA.
(4)Division of Orthopaedic Trauma, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, NYU 
Hospital for Joint Diseases, New York, NY. Electronic address: 
liporace33@gmail.com.

INTRODUCTION: As with some procedures, trauma fellowship training and greater 
surgeon experience may result in better outcomes following intramedullary 
nailing (IMN) of diaphyseal femur fractures. However, surgeons with such 
training and experience may not always be available to all patients. The purpose 
of this study is to determine whether trauma training affects the post-operative 
difference in femoral version (DFV) following IMN.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Between 2000 and 2009, 417 consecutive patients with 
diaphyseal femur fractures (AO/OTA 32A-C) were treated via IMN. Inclusion 
criteria for this study included complete baseline and demographic documentation 
as well as pre-operative films for fracture classification and post-operative CT 
scanogram (per institutional protocol) for version and length measurement of 
both the nailed and uninjured femurs. Exclusion criteria included bilateral 
injuries, multiple ipsilateral lower extremity fractures, previous injury, and 
previous deformity. Of the initial 417 subjects, 355 patients met our inclusion 
criteria. Other data included in our analysis were age, sex, injury mechanism, 
open vs. closed fracture, daytime vs. nighttime surgery, mechanism of injury, 
and AO and Winquist classifications. Post-operative femoral version of both 
lower extremities was measured on CT scanogram by an orthopaedic trauma 
fellowship trained surgeon. Standard univariate and multivariate analyses were 
performed to determine statistically significant risk factors for malrotation 
between the two cohorts.
RESULTS: Overall, 80.3% (288/355) of all fractures were fixed by trauma-trained 
surgeons. The mean post-operative DFV was 8.7° in these patients, compared to 
10.7° in those treated by surgeons of other subspecialties. This difference was 
not statistically significant when accounting for other factors in a 
multivariate model (p>0.05). The same statistical trend was true when analyzing 
outcomes of only the more severe Winquist type III and IV fractures. 
Additionally, surgeon experience was not significantly predictive of 
post-operative version for either trauma or non-trauma surgeons (p>0.05 for 
both).
CONCLUSIONS: Post-operative version or percentage of DFV >15° did not 
significantly differ following IMN of diaphyseal femur fractures between 
surgeons with and without trauma fellowship training. However, prospective data 
that removes the inherent bias that the more complex cases are left for the 
traumatologists are required before a definitive comparison is made.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.injury.2014.01.024
PMID: 24630333 [Indexed for MEDLINE]