1. Vet Clin Pathol. 2014 Dec;43(4):487-95. doi: 10.1111/vcp.12202. Epub 2014 Oct
3.

Reporting and interpreting red blood cell morphology: is there discordance 
between clinical pathologists and clinicians?

Newman AW(1), Rishniw M, Behling-Kelly E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Population Medicine and Diagnostic Sciences, Cornell University 
College of Veterinary Medicine, Ithaca, NY, USA.

BACKGROUND: Clinical pathologists (CPs) report RBC morphologic (RBC-M) changes 
to assist clinicians in prioritizing differential diagnoses. However, reporting 
is subjective, semiquantitative, and potentially biased. Reporting decisions 
vary among CPs, and reports may not be interpreted by clinicians as intended.
OBJECTIVES: The aims of this study were to survey clinicians and CPs about RBC-M 
terms and their clinical value, and identify areas of agreement and discordance.
METHODS: Online surveys were distributed to small animal clinicians via the 
Veterinary Information Network and to CPs via the ASVCP listserv. A quiz 
assessed understanding of RBC-M terms among respondent groups. Descriptive 
statistics were used to analyze responses to survey questions, and quiz scores 
were compared among groups.
RESULTS: Analyzable responses were obtained from 1662 clinicians and 82 CPs. 
Both clinicians and CPs considered some terms, e.g., agglutination, useful, 
whereas only CPs considered other terms, e.g., ghost cells, useful. All groups 
interpreted certain terms, e.g., Heinz bodies, correctly, whereas some 
clinicians misinterpreted others, e.g., eccentrocytes. Responses revealed that 
CPs often do not report RBC-M they consider insignificant, when present in low 
numbers. Twenty-eight percent of clinicians think CPs review all blood smears 
while only 19% of CPs report reviewing all smears.
CONCLUSIONS: Important differences about the clinical relevance of certain RBC-M 
terms exist between clinicians and CPs. Inclusion of interpretive comments on 
CBC reports is the clearest way to ensure that RBC-M changes are interpreted as 
intended by the CP. Reporting practices should be examined critically to improve 
communication, transparency, and ultimately medical decisions.

© 2014 American Society for Veterinary Clinical Pathology.

DOI: 10.1111/vcp.12202
PMID: 25280365 [Indexed for MEDLINE]