1. An Pediatr (Barc). 2015 Jul;83(1):33-9. doi: 10.1016/j.anpedi.2014.08.011.
Epub  2014 Oct 7.

[Nutritional assessment of gluten-free diet. Is gluten-free diet deficient in 
some nutrient?].

[Article in Spanish]

Salazar Quero JC(1), Espín Jaime B(2), Rodríguez Martínez A(2), Argüelles Martín 
F(3), García Jiménez R(4), Rubio Murillo M(2), Pizarro Martín A(2).

Author information:
(1)UGC Pediatría, Unidad de Gastroenterología, Hepatología y Nutrición 
pediátricas, Hospital Universitario Virgen del Rocío, Sevilla, España. 
Electronic address: josesolrac@hotmail.com.
(2)UGC Pediatría, Unidad de Gastroenterología, Hepatología y Nutrición 
pediátricas, Hospital Universitario Virgen del Rocío, Sevilla, España.
(3)Unidad de Gastroenterología, Hepatología y Nutrición pediátricas, Hospital 
Universitario Virgen Macarena, Sevilla, España.
(4)UGC Medicina Nuclear, Hospital Universitario Virgen del Rocío, Sevilla, 
España.

INTRODUCTION: The gluten-free diet has traditionally been accepted as a healthy 
diet, but there are articles advocating that it may have some nutritional 
deficiencies. The current study assesses whether there was any change in the 
contributions of calories, essential elements, proportion of fatty acids, 
vitamins, minerals and fiber in children who were diagnosed with celiac 
diseases, comparing the diet with gluten prior one year after diagnosis with the 
diet without gluten to the year of diagnosis. The level of clinical or 
analytical impact that nutritional deficits could have was also assessed.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: A prospective,descriptive, observational study in which 
information was collected from a dietary survey, anthropometric and analytical 
data at pre-diagnosis of celiac disease and following a gluten diet and one year 
after celiac disease diagnosis, under gluten-free diet.
RESULTS: A total of 37 patients meet the study criteria. A decrease in the 
intake of saturated fatty acids was found, with an increase of monounsaturated 
fatty acids and an increase in the intake of phosphorus in the diet without 
gluten. A deficient intake of vitamin D was found in both diets. Clinically, at 
year of gluten-free diet there was an improvement in weight and size. 
Analytically, there was an improvement in hemoglobin, ferritin, vitamin D, and 
parathyroid hormone in plasma.
CONCLUSION: The gluten-free diet has minimal deficiencies, similar to those 
present in the diet with gluten, with an improvement in the lipid profile by 
increasing the proportion of monounsaturated fatty acids to the detriment of 
saturated fatty acids.

Copyright © 2014 Asociación Española de Pediatría. Published by Elsevier España, 
S.L.U. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anpedi.2014.08.011
PMID: 25304452 [Indexed for MEDLINE]