1. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2015 Mar;72(3):465-72. doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2014.12.019.
Epub  2015 Jan 13.

Is cardiovascular evaluation necessary prior to and during beta-blocker therapy 
for infantile hemangiomas?: A cohort study.

Raphael MF(1), Breugem CC(2), Vlasveld FA(3), de Graaf M(4), Slieker MG(5), 
Pasmans SG(6), Breur JM(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Dermatology and Allergology, Wilhelmina Children's 
Hospital, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands; Center 
for Congenital Vascular Anomalies Utrecht, Wilhelmina Children's Hospital, 
University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands. Electronic address: 
m.f.raphael-2@umcutrecht.nl.
(2)Department of Pediatric Plastic Surgery, Wilhelmina Children's Hospital, 
University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands; Center for 
Congenital Vascular Anomalies Utrecht, Wilhelmina Children's Hospital, 
University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Pediatric Dermatology and Allergology, Wilhelmina Children's 
Hospital, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Pediatric Dermatology and Allergology, Wilhelmina Children's 
Hospital, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands; Center 
for Congenital Vascular Anomalies Utrecht, Wilhelmina Children's Hospital, 
University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Wilhelmina Children's Hospital, 
University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(6)Department of Pediatric Dermatology and Allergology, Wilhelmina Children's 
Hospital, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands; Center 
for Congenital Vascular Anomalies Utrecht, Wilhelmina Children's Hospital, 
University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands; Department of 
Pediatric Dermatology, Erasmus Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(7)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Wilhelmina Children's Hospital, 
University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands; Center for 
Congenital Vascular Anomalies Utrecht, Wilhelmina Children's Hospital, 
University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Although consensus guidelines for pretreatment evaluation and 
monitoring of propranolol therapy in patients with infantile hemangiomas (IH) 
have been formulated, little is known about the cardiovascular side effects.
OBJECTIVES: We sought to analyze cardiovascular evaluations in patients with IH 
at baseline and during treatment with an oral beta-blocker.
METHODS: Data from 109 patients with IH were retrospectively analyzed. Patient 
and family history, pretreatment electrocardiogram (ECG), heart rate, and blood 
pressure were evaluated before initiation of beta-blocker therapy. Blood 
pressure and standardized questionnaires addressing side effects were evaluated 
during treatment.
RESULTS: Questionnaire analyses (n = 83) identified 3 cases with a family 
history of cardiovascular disease in first-degree relatives. ECG findings were 
normal in each case and no serious complication of therapy occurred. ECG 
abnormalities were found in 6.5% of patients but there were no contraindications 
to beta-blocker therapy and no major complications. Hypotension in 9 patients 
did not require therapy adjustment. In all, 88 parents (81%) reported side 
effects during beta-blocker treatment.
LIMITATIONS: The relatively small patient cohort is a limitation.
CONCLUSION: Pretreatment ECG is of limited value for patients with an 
unremarkable cardiovascular history and a normal heart rate and blood pressure. 
Hypotension may occur during treatment.

Copyright © 2014 American Academy of Dermatology, Inc. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaad.2014.12.019
PMID: 25592625 [Indexed for MEDLINE]