1. J Music Ther. 2015 Spring;52(1):78-116. doi: 10.1093/jmt/thu039. Epub 2015 Feb
 17.

Do communication disorders extend to musical messages? An answer from children 
with hearing loss or autism spectrum disorders.

Whipple CM(1), Gfeller K(2), Driscoll V(1), Oleson J(1), McGregor K(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Music, The University of Iowa School of Music, Department of 
Communication Sciences and Disorders, The University of Iowa Iowa Cochlear 
Implant Clinical Research Center, University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics 
Department of Biostatistics, The University of Iowa Department of Communication 
Sciences and Disorders, The DeLTA Center, The University of Iowa.
(2)School of Music, The University of Iowa School of Music, Department of 
Communication Sciences and Disorders, The University of Iowa Iowa Cochlear 
Implant Clinical Research Center, University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics 
Department of Biostatistics, The University of Iowa Department of Communication 
Sciences and Disorders, The DeLTA Center, The University of Iowa 
kay-gfeller@uiowa.edu.

BACKGROUND: Effective musical communication requires conveyance of the intended 
message in a manner perceptible to the receiver. Communication disorders that 
impair transmitting or decoding of structural features of music (e.g., pitch, 
timbre) and/or symbolic representation may result in atypical musical 
communication, which can have a negative impact on music therapy interventions.
OBJECTIVE: This study compared recognition of symbolic representation of 
emotions or movements in music by two groups of children with different 
communicative characteristics: severe to profound hearing loss (using cochlear 
implants [CI]) and autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Their responses were compared 
to those of children with typical-development and normal hearing (TD-NH). 
Accuracy was examined as a function of communicative status, emotional or 
movement category, and individual characteristics.
METHODS: Participants listened to recorded musical excerpts conveying emotions 
or movements and matched them with labels. Measures relevant to auditory and/or 
language function were also gathered.
RESULTS: There was no significant difference between the ASD and TD-NH groups in 
identification of musical emotions or movements. However, the CI group was 
significantly less accurate than the other two groups in identification of both 
emotions and movements. Mixed effects logistic regression revealed different 
patterns of accuracy for specific emotions as a function of group.
CONCLUSION: Conveyance of emotions or movements through music may be decoded 
differently by persons with different types of communication disorders. Because 
music is the primary therapeutic tool in music therapy sessions, clinicians 
should consider these differential abilities when selecting music for clinical 
interventions focusing on emotions or movement.

© the American Music Therapy Association 2015. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jmt/thu039
PMCID: PMC4414659
PMID: 25691513 [Indexed for MEDLINE]