1. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2015 Aug 1;40(15):E879-85. doi: 
10.1097/BRS.0000000000000984.

The Deformity Angular Ratio: Does It Correlate With High-Risk Cases for 
Potential Spinal Cord Monitoring Alerts in Pediatric 3-Column Thoracic Spinal 
Deformity Corrective Surgery?

Lewis ND(1), Keshen SG, Lenke LG, Zywiel MG, Skaggs DL, Dear TE, Strantzas S, 
Lewis SJ.

Author information:
(1)*Toronto Western Hospital, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada; †Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO; ‡Toronto Western 
Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; and §Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Los 
Angeles, CA.

STUDY DESIGN: A retrospective analysis.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to determine whether the deformity 
angular ratio (DAR) can reliably assess the neurological risks of patients 
undergoing deformity correction.
SUMMARY OF BACKGROUND DATA: Identifying high-risk patients and procedures can 
help ensure that appropriate measures are taken to minimize neurological 
complications during spinal deformity corrections. Subjectively, surgeons look 
at radiographs and evaluate the riskiness of the procedure. However, 2 curves of 
similar magnitude and location can have significantly different risks of 
neurological deficit during surgery. Whether the curve spans many levels or just 
a few can significantly influence surgical strategies. Lenke et al have proposed 
the DAR, which is a measure of curve magnitude per level of deformity.
METHODS: The data from 35 pediatric spinal deformity correction procedures with 
thoracic 3-column osteotomies were reviewed. Measurements from preoperative 
radiographs were used to calculate the DAR. Binary logistic regression was used 
to model the relationship between DARs (independent variables) and presence or 
absence of an intraoperative alert (dependent variable).
RESULTS: In patients undergoing 3-column osteotomies, sagittal curve magnitude 
and total curve magnitude were associated with increased incidence of 
transcranial motor evoked potential changes. Total DAR greater than 45° per 
level and sagittal DAR greater than 22° per level were associated with a 75% 
incidence of a motor evoked potential alert, with the incidence increasing to 
90% with sagittal DAR of 28° per level.
CONCLUSION: In patients undergoing 3-column osteotomies for severe spinal 
deformities, the DAR was predictive of patients developing intraoperative motor 
evoked potential alerts. Identifying accurate radiographical, patient, and 
procedural risk factors in the correction of severe deformities can help prepare 
the surgical team to improve safety and outcomes when carrying out complex 
spinal corrections.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: 3.

DOI: 10.1097/BRS.0000000000000984
PMID: 26222664 [Indexed for MEDLINE]