1. BMC Psychiatry. 2016 Feb 6;16:25. doi: 10.1186/s12888-016-0733-9.

Is adjustment for reporting heterogeneity necessary in sleep disorders? Results 
from the Japanese World Health Survey.

Tareque MI(1), Ikeda N(2), Koshio A(3), Hasegawa T(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Population Science and Human Resource Development, University 
of Rajshahi, Rajshahi, Bangladesh. tareque_pshd@yahoo.com.
(2)Center for International Collaboration and Partnership, National Institute of 
Health and Nutrition, National Institutes of Biomedical Innovation, Health and 
Nutrition, Tokyo, Japan. ikedan@nibiohn.go.jp.
(3)The Graduate School of Project Design, Tokyo, Japan. koshio@nms.ac.jp.
(4)Department of Health Policy and Management, Nippon Medical School, Tokyo, 
Japan. hasegawatoshihiko@nms.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: Anchoring vignettes are brief texts describing a hypothetical 
character who illustrates a certain fixed level of a trait under evaluation. 
This research uses vignettes to elucidate factors associated with sleep 
disorders in adult Japanese before and after adjustment for reporting 
heterogeneity in self-reports. This study also evaluates the need for adjusting 
for reporting heterogeneity in the management of sleep and energy related 
problems in Japan.
METHODS: We investigated a dataset of 1002 respondents aged 18 years and over 
from the Japanese World Health Survey, which collected information through 
face-to-face interview from 2002 to 2003. The ordered probit model and the 
Compound Hierarchical Ordered Probit (CHOPIT) model, which incorporated 
anchoring vignettes, were employed to estimate and compare associations of sleep 
and energy with socio-demographic and life-style factors before and after 
adjustment for differences in response category cut-points for each individual.
RESULTS: The prevalence of self-reported problems with sleep and energy was 53 
%. Without correction of cut-point shifts, age, sex, and the number of 
comorbidities were significantly associated with a greater severity of 
sleep-related problems. After correction, age, the number of comorbidities, and 
regular exercise were significantly associated with a greater severity of 
sleep-related problems; sex was no longer a significant factor. Compared to the 
ordered probit model, the CHOPIT model provided two changes with a subtle 
difference in the magnitude of regression coefficients after correction for 
reporting heterogeneity.
CONCLUSION: Sleep disorders are common in the general adult population of Japan. 
Correction for reporting heterogeneity using anchoring vignettes is not a 
necessary tool for proper management of sleep and energy related problems among 
Japanese adults. Older age, gender differences in communicating sleep-related 
problems, the presence of multiple morbidities, and regular exercise should be 
the focus of policies and clinical practice to improve sleep and energy 
management in Japan.

DOI: 10.1186/s12888-016-0733-9
PMCID: PMC4744451
PMID: 26852225 [Indexed for MEDLINE]