1. Chest. 2016 Feb;149(2):508-515. doi: 10.1016/j.chest.2015.10.066.

Is Alveolar Macrophage Phagocytic Dysfunction in Children With Protracted 
Bacterial Bronchitis a Forerunner to Bronchiectasis?

Hodge S(1), Upham JW(2), Pizzutto S(3), Petsky HL(4), Yerkovich S(5), Baines 
KJ(6), Gibson P(6), Simpson JL(6), Buntain H(7), Chen ACH(5), Hodge G(8), Chang 
AB(9).

Author information:
(1)Chronic Inflammatory Lung Disease Research Laboratory, Lung Research Unit, 
Hanson Institute and Department of Thoracic Medicine, Royal Adelaide Hospital, 
and The School of Medicine, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA, Australia. 
Electronic address: sandra.hodge@health.sa.gov.au.
(2)Princess Alexandra Hospital, Brisbane, QLD, Australia; The School of 
Medicine, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, Australia.
(3)Child Health Division, Menzies School of Health Research, Darwin, NT, 
Australia.
(4)Queensland University of Technology, South Brisbane, QLD, Australia.
(5)The School of Medicine, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, 
Australia.
(6)Respiratory and Sleep Medicine, School of Medicine and Public Health, Centre 
for Asthma and Respiratory Disease, The University of Newcastle, Callaghan, NSW, 
Australia.
(7)Queensland Children's Health Service, Brisbane, QLD, and Queensland 
Children's Medical Research Institute, Brisbane, QLD, Australia.
(8)Chronic Inflammatory Lung Disease Research Laboratory, Lung Research Unit, 
Hanson Institute and Department of Thoracic Medicine, Royal Adelaide Hospital, 
and The School of Medicine, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA, Australia.
(9)Child Health Division, Menzies School of Health Research, Darwin, NT, 
Australia; Queensland Children's Health Service, Brisbane, QLD, and Queensland 
Children's Medical Research Institute, Brisbane, QLD, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Children with recurrent protracted bacterial bronchitis (PBB) and 
bronchiectasis share common features, and PBB is likely a forerunner to 
bronchiectasis. Both diseases are associated with neutrophilic inflammation and 
frequent isolation of potentially pathogenic microorganisms, including 
nontypeable Haemophilus influenzae (NTHi), from the lower airway. Defective 
alveolar macrophage phagocytosis of apoptotic bronchial epithelial cells 
(efferocytosis), as found in other chronic lung diseases, may also contribute to 
tissue damage and neutrophil persistence. Thus, in children with bronchiectasis 
or PBB and in control subjects, we quantified the phagocytosis of airway 
apoptotic cells and NTHi by alveolar macrophages and related the phagocytic 
capacity to clinical and airway inflammation.
METHODS: Children with bronchiectasis (n = 55) or PBB (n = 13) and control 
subjects (n = 13) were recruited. Alveolar macrophage phagocytosis, 
efferocytosis, and expression of phagocytic scavenger receptors were assessed by 
flow cytometry. Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid interleukin (IL) 1β was measured by 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.
RESULTS: For children with PBB or bronchiectasis, macrophage phagocytic capacity 
was significantly lower than for control subjects (P = .003 and P < .001 for 
efferocytosis and P = .041 and P = .004 for phagocytosis of NTHi; PBB and 
bronchiectasis, respectively); median phagocytosis of NTHi for the groups was as 
follows: bronchiectasis, 13.7% (interquartile range [IQR], 11%-16%); PBB, 16% 
(IQR, 11%-16%); control subjects, 19.0% (IQR, 13%-21%); and median efferocytosis 
for the groups was as follows: bronchiectasis, 14.1% (IQR, 10%-16%); PBB, 16.2% 
(IQR, 14%-17%); control subjects, 18.1% (IQR, 16%-21%). Mannose receptor 
expression was significantly reduced in the bronchiectasis group (P = .019), and 
IL-1β increased in both bronchiectasis and PBB groups vs control subjects.
CONCLUSIONS: A reduced alveolar macrophage phagocytic host response to apoptotic 
cells or NTHi may contribute to neutrophilic inflammation and NTHi colonization 
in both PBB and bronchiectasis. Whether this mechanism also contributes to the 
progression of PBB to bronchiectasis remains unknown.

Copyright © 2016 American College of Chest Physicians. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chest.2015.10.066
PMID: 26867834 [Indexed for MEDLINE]