1. Rev Esp Cir Ortop Traumatol. 2017 Jan-Feb;61(1):19-27. doi: 
10.1016/j.recot.2016.07.007. Epub 2016 Nov 29.

Should lower limb fractures be treated surgically in patients with chronic 
spinal injuries? Experience in a reference centre.

[Article in English, Spanish]

Barrera-Ochoa S(1), Haddad S(2), Rodríguez-Alabau S(3), Teixidor J(2), Tomás 
J(2), Molero V(2).

Author information:
(1)Servicio de Cirugía Ortopédica y Traumatología, Hospital Universitario Vall 
d'Hebron, Universidad Autónoma Barcelona (UAB), Barcelona, España; Grupo de 
Ingeniería Tisular Musculoesquelética, Institut de Recerca Vall d'Hebron , 
Barcelona, España; Servicio de Cirugía Ortopédica y Traumatología, Hospital 
Universitario Quirón-Dexeus, ICATME, Barcelona, España. Electronic address: 
Dr.barreraochoa@gmail.com.
(2)Servicio de Cirugía Ortopédica y Traumatología, Hospital Universitario Vall 
d'Hebron, Universidad Autónoma Barcelona (UAB), Barcelona, España.
(3)Servicio de Cirugía Ortopédica y Traumatología, Hospital Universitario 
Quirón-Dexeus, ICATME, Barcelona, España.

OBJECTIVE: To report the outcomes of surgical treatment of lower limb fractures 
in patients with chronic spinal cord injuries.
MATERIAL AND METHOD: A total of 37 lower limb fractures were treated from 2003 
to 2010, of which 25 fractures were treated surgically and 12 orthopaedically.
RESULTS: Patients of the surgical group had better clinical results, range of 
motion, bone consolidation, and less pressure ulcers and radiological 
misalignment. No differences were detected between groups in terms of pain, 
hospital stay, and medical complications.
DISCUSSION: There is no currently consensus regarding the management of lower 
limb fractures in patients with chronic spinal cord injuries, but the trend has 
been conservative treatment due to the high rate of complications in surgical 
treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Chronic spinal cord injuries patients with lower limb fractures who 
are treated surgically achieved a more reliable consolidation, practically a 
free range of motion, low rate of cutaneous complications, and pain associated 
with the fracture. This allows a quick return to the previous standard of 
living, and should be considered as an alternative to orthopaedic treatment in 
these patients.

Copyright © 2016 SECOT. Publicado por Elsevier España, S.L.U. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.recot.2016.07.007
PMID: 27908583 [Indexed for MEDLINE]