1. Infect Dis Poverty. 2017 Feb 15;6(1):24. doi: 10.1186/s40249-017-0240-3.

Antiretroviral therapy related adverse effects: Can sub-Saharan Africa cope with 
the new "test and treat" policy of the World Health Organization?

Nansseu JR(1)(2), Bigna JJ(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Public Health, Faculty of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences of 
the University of Yaoundé I, PO Box 1364, Yaoundé, Cameroon. 
jobertrichie_nansseu@yahoo.fr.
(2)Sickle Cell Disease Unit, Mother and Child Centre of the Chantal Biya 
Foundation, Yaoundé, Cameroon. jobertrichie_nansseu@yahoo.fr.
(3)Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, Centre Pasteur of Cameroon, 
Yaoundé, Cameroon.
(4)Faculty of Medicine, University of Paris Sud XI, Le Kremlin Bicêtre, Paris, 
France.

BACKGROUND: Recent studies have shown that early antiretroviral therapy (ART) 
initiation results in significant HIV transmission reduction. This is the 
rationale behind the "test and treat" policy of the World Health Organization 
(WHO). Implementation of this policy will lead to an increased incidence of 
ART-related adverse effects, especially in sub-Saharan Africa (SSA). Is the 
region yet ready to cope with such a challenging issue?
MAIN BODY: The introduction and widespread use of ART have drastically changed 
the natural history of HIV/AIDS, but exposure to ART leads to serious 
medication-related adverse effects mainly explained by mitochondrial toxicities, 
and the situation will get worse in the near future. Indeed, ART is associated 
with an increased risk of developing cardiovascular disease, lipodystrophy, 
prediabetes and overt diabetes, insulin resistance and hyperlactatemia/lactic 
acidosis. The prevalence of these disorders is already high in SSA, and the 
situation will be exacerbated by the implementation of the new WHO 
recommendations. Most SSA countries are characterized by (extreme) poverty, very 
weak health systems, inadequate and low quality of health services, 
inaccessibility to existing health facilities, lack of (qualified) health 
personnel, lack of adequate equipment, inaccessibility and unaffordability of 
medicines, and heavy workload in a context of a double burden of disease. 
Additionally, there is dearth of data on the incidence and predictive factors of 
ART-related adverse effects in SSA, to anticipate on strategies that should be 
put in place to prevent the occurrence of these conditions or properly estimate 
the upcoming burden and prepare an adequate response plan. These are required if 
we are to anticipate and effectively prevent this upcoming burden.
CONCLUSION: While SSA would be the first region to experience the huge benefits 
of implementing the "test and treat" policy of the WHO, the region is not yet 
prepared to manage the consequential increased burden of ART-related toxic and 
metabolic complications. Urgent measures should be taken to fill the lacunae if 
SSA is not to become over-burdened by the consequences of the "test and treat" 
policy.

DOI: 10.1186/s40249-017-0240-3
PMCID: PMC5310075
PMID: 28196511 [Indexed for MEDLINE]