1. J Fam Pract. 1993 Dec;37(6):555-63.

Does family practice at residency teaching sites reflect community practice?

Gilchrist V(1), Miller RS, Gillanders WR, Scheid DC, Logue EE, Iverson DC, 
Oprandi AM, Weldy DL, Krell MA.

Author information:
(1)Aultman Hospital, Canton, OH.

BACKGROUND: Family medicine has aspired to train residents and conduct research 
in settings that closely resemble community practice. The purpose of this study 
was to compare the patient characteristics of the ambulatory teaching centers of 
a consortium of seven community-based university-affiliated family practice 
residency programs in northeast Ohio with the National Ambulatory Medical Care 
Survey (NAMCS) results for family physicians (FPs) and general practitioners 
(GPs).
METHODS: Ninety-eight faculty and resident physicians at the residency training 
site of the Northeastern Ohio Universities College of Medicine collected data on 
all ambulatory patient visits (N = 1498) for one randomly chosen week between 
July 1, 1991, and June 30, 1992. We compared these data with patient visits 
reported in the 1990 NAMCS for FPs and GPs.
RESULTS: The residency training sites saw slightly more children, women, blacks, 
and Medicare and Medicaid patients. The most common reason for an office visit 
in both populations was an undifferentiated symptom. Fifteen of the top 20 
"reason for visit" codes were identical, as were 14 of the top 20 diagnoses. 
More preventive and therapeutic services were offered or performed at our 
residency training sites but fewer diagnostic services were performed. There 
were fewer consultations requested at our residency training sites but similar 
hospitalization rates for patients. The mean duration of visit differed by only 
1 minute.
CONCLUSIONS: The residency training sites of the Northeastern Ohio Universities 
College of Medicine provide patient care opportunities similar to those found in 
a national survey of family and general practitioners.

PMID: 8245806 [Indexed for MEDLINE]