1. Circulation. 1997 Apr 1;95(7):1844-52. doi: 10.1161/01.cir.95.7.1844.

Bridge experience with long-term implantable left ventricular assist devices. 
Are they an alternative to transplantation?

Oz MC(1), Argenziano M, Catanese KA, Gardocki MT, Goldstein DJ, Ashton RC, 
Gelijns AC, Rose EA, Levin HR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center, New York, NY, 
USA. mco2@columbia.edu

BACKGROUND: If long-term use of left ventricular assist devices (LVADs) as 
bridges to transplantation is successful, the issue of permanent device 
implantation in lieu of transplantation could be addressed through the creation 
of appropriately designed trials. Our medium-term experience with both 
pneumatically and electrically powered ThermoCardiosystems LVADs is presented to 
outline the benefits and limitations of device support in lieu of 
transplantation.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Detailed records were kept prospectively for all patients 
undergoing LVAD insertion. Fifty-eight LVADs were inserted over 5 years, with a 
survival rate of 74%. Mean patient age was 50 years, and duration of support 
averaged 98 days. Although common, both preexisting infection and infection 
during LVAD support were not associated with increased mortality or decreased 
rate of successful transplantation. Thromboembolic complications were rare, 
occurring in only three patients (5%) despite the absence of anticoagulation. 
Ventricular arrhythmias were well tolerated in all patients except in cases of 
early perioperative right ventricular failure, with no deaths. Right ventricular 
failure occurred in one third of patients and was managed in a small percentage 
by right ventricular assist device (RVAD) support and/or inhaled nitric oxide 
therapy. There were no serious device malfunctions, but five graft-related 
hemorrhages resulted in two deaths. Finally, a variety of noncardiac surgical 
procedures were performed in LVAD recipients, with no major morbidity and 
mortality.
CONCLUSIONS: Over all, our medium-term experience with implantable LVAD support 
is encouraging. Although additional areas of investigation exist, improvements 
in patients selection and management together with device alterations that have 
reduced the thromboembolic incidence and facilitated patient rehabilitation lead 
us to believe that a prospective, randomized trial is indicated to study the 
role that LVADs may have as an alternative to medical management.

DOI: 10.1161/01.cir.95.7.1844
PMID: 9107172 [Indexed for MEDLINE]