1. Radiol Med. 1997 Nov;94(5):433-9.

["Occult" posttraumatic lesions of the knee: can magnetic resonance substitute 
for diagnostic arthroscopy?].

[Article in Italian]

Tamburrini O(1), Bianchi D, Capparelli G, Barresi D, Arcuri PP, Barbalace G, 
Stanà C.

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Sperimentale e Clinica, Università degli Studi di 
Reggio Calabria.

PURPOSE: We investigated the actual role of MRI versus arthroscopy in the 
detection and characterization of occult bone and/or cartilage injuries in 
patients with previous musculoskeletal trauma of the knee, pain and severe 
functional impairment. Occult post-traumatic osteochondral injuries of the knee 
are trauma-related bone and/or cartilage damage missed at plain radiography.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: We retrospectively selected 70 patients (men:women = 7:3; 
age range: 35 +/- 7 years) with a history of acute musculoskeletal trauma, 
negative conventional radiographs, pain and limited joint movements. All 
patients were submitted to conventional radiography, arthroscopy and MRI, the 
latter with 0.5 T units and T1-weighted SE. T2-weighted GE and FIR sequences 
with fat suppression.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: We identified three types of occult post-traumatic 
injuries by morpho-topographic and signal intensity patterns: bone bruises (no. 
25), subchondral (no. 33) and osteochondral (no. 35) injuries. Arthroscopy 
depicted 45 osteochondral and 19 chondral injuries. A bone bruise was defined as 
a typical subcortical area of signal loss, with various shapes, on T1-weighted 
images and of increased signal intensity on T2-weighted and FIR images. The 
cortical bone and articular cartilage were normal in all cases, while 
osteochondral injuries exhibited associated bone and cartilage damage with the 
same abnormal MR signal intensity. Sprain was the mechanism of injury in 52 
cases, bruise in 12 and stress in 6. In 52 sprains (30 in valgus), the injury 
site was the lateral compartment in 92.3% of cases (100% in valgus), associated 
with meniscal damage in 73% of cases (90% in valgus) and with ligament injury in 
90.4% (100% in valgus). In 12 bruises, the injury site was the lateral 
compartment in 58.3% of cases, the knee cap in 25% and the medial compartment in 
16.7%; meniscal damage was associated in 25% of cases and ligament damage in 
8.3%. In 6 stress injuries, the injury site was localized in the medial tibial 
condyle in 80% of cases, while meniscal and ligament tears were absent.
CONCLUSIONS: After comparing MR with arthroscopic findings and reviewing the 
available literature, we conclude that arthroscopy permits the direct 
visualization of even fine articular surface changes but does not depict the 
subchondral bone, the most frequent site of injury detected with MRI. MRI was a 
very useful tool in the detection and characterization of the different types of 
occult bone and/or cartilage injuries and showed a statistically significant 
correlation between site and distribution of bone and cartilage injuries and 
between internal damage and trauma mechanisms. Therefore, we believe that MRI 
can help avoid diagnostic arthroscopy in the patients with a history of 
post-traumatic pain, acute articular blocks and negative radiographic findings.

PMID: 9465206 [Indexed for MEDLINE]