1. Kidney Int. 1998 Oct;54(4):1290-5. doi: 10.1046/j.1523-1755.1998.00093.x.

Autoxidation products of both carbohydrates and lipids are increased in uremic 
plasma: is there oxidative stress in uremia?

Miyata T(1), Fu MX, Kurokawa K, van Ypersele de Strihou C, Thorpe SR, Baynes JW.

Author information:
(1)Molecular and Cellular Nephrology, Institute of Medical Sciences and 
Department of Internal Medicine, Tokai University School of Medicine, Isehara, 
Kanagawa, Japan. t-miyata@is.icc.u-tokai.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Advanced glycation end products (AGEs), formed by non-enzymatic 
glycation and oxidation (glycoxidation) reactions, have been implicated in the 
pathogenesis of several diseases, including normoglycemic uremia. AGE research 
in uremia has focused on the accumulation of carbohydrate-derived adducts 
generated by the Maillard reaction. Recent studies, however, have demonstrated 
that one AGE, the glycoxidation product carboxymethyllysine (CML), could be 
derived not only from carbohydrates but also from oxidation of polyunsaturated 
fatty acids in vitro, raising the possibility that both carbohydrate and lipid 
autoxidation might be increased in uremia.
METHODS: To address this hypothesis, we applied gas chromatography-mass 
spectrometry and high performance liquid chromatography to measure protein 
adducts formed in uremic plasma by reactions between carbonyl compounds and 
protein amino groups: pentosidine derived from carbohydrate-derived carbonyls, 
malondialdehyde (MDA)-lysine derived from lipid-derived carbonyls, and CML 
originating possibly from both sources.
RESULTS: All three adducts were elevated in uremic plasma. Plasma CML levels 
were mainly (>95%) albumin bound. Their levels were not correlated with 
fructoselysine levels and were similar in diabetic and non-diabetic patients on 
hemodialysis, indicating that their increase was not driven by glucose. 
Pentosidine and MDA-lysine were also increased in plasma to the same extent in 
diabetic and non-diabetic hemodialysis patients. Statistical analysis indicated 
that plasma levels of CML correlated weakly (P < 0.05) with those of pentosidine 
and MDA-lysine, but that pentosidine and MDA-lysine varied independently (P > 
0.5).
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that the increased levels of AGEs in blood, and 
probably in tissues, reported in uremia implicate a broad derangement in 
non-enzymatic biochemistry involving alterations in autoxidation of both 
carbohydrates and lipids.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1523-1755.1998.00093.x
PMID: 9767546 [Indexed for MEDLINE]