1. Med Educ. 1999 Jul;33(7):509-14. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2923.1999.00354.x.

Can medical students contribute to quality assurance programmes in day surgery?

Rudkin GE(1), O'Driscoll MC, Limb R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, The Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Woodville, SA, 
Australia.

CONTEXT AND OBJECTIVES: Health care delivery has undertaken a major shift from 
inpatient management to ambulatory surgical care with increasing emphasis on 
quality assurance (QA) processes. Educational opportunities for medical 
undergraduate programmes are being sought in the day surgery environment. Our 
study was undertaken to explore ways in which senior medical students can 
actively contribute to QA processes as part of an undergraduate day surgery 
educational programme.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: Health care delivery has undertaken a major shift from 
inpatient management to ambulatory surgical care with increasing emphasis on 
quality assurance (QA) processes. Educational opportunities for medical 
undergraduate programmes are being sought in the day surgery environment. Our 
study was undertaken to explore ways in which senior medical students can 
actively contribute to the QA processes as part of an undergraduate day surgery 
educational programme.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: Fifty-nine final year medical students followed allocated 
patients with common surgical conditions through all phases of the day surgery 
process. Students kept records about each case in a log book and also presented 
their cases at weekly Problem Based Learning tutorials. An audit of student log 
books and review of tutorial records was conducted for the 1996 and 1997 
academic years, in order to evaluate student contribution to QA.
RESULTS: Students followed 621 cases, representing a sampling of 14. 1% day 
surgery cases. Categories of problems highlighted by students included 
inappropriate patient and procedure selection, inadequate pain management, 
discharge, communication and resource issues. Students made a number of 
recommendations including the development of multilingual videotapes and patient 
information sheets for non-English speaking patients, avoidance of bilateral 
surgical procedures and improved links with local medical officers. They also 
developed new guidelines and protocols.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study confirms that students are able to identify QA issues and 
propose solutions. We recommend that students have a formally recognized place 
in day surgery QA programmes, to close the QA loop and to adequately prepare 
them for medical practice in the 21st century.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2923.1999.00354.x
PMID: 10354335 [Indexed for MEDLINE]