1. Chest. 2001 Sep;120(3):770-7. doi: 10.1378/chest.120.3.770.

Do inhaled corticosteroids affect perception of dyspnea during 
bronchoconstriction in asthma?

Ottanelli R(1), Rosi E, Romagnoli I, Grazzini M, Stendardi L, Duranti R, Scano 
G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Section of Immunoallergology and Respiratory 
Diseases, University of Florence, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Some of the disagreements on the perception of dyspnea (PD) during 
bronchoconstriction in asthma patients could depend on the interrelationships 
among the following: (1) the influence of baseline airflow obstruction on the 
patient's ability to detect any further increase in airway resistance; (2) the 
effect of eosinophilic inflammation on the airway; (3) bronchial 
hyperresponsiveness (BHR); and (4) the effect of inhaled corticosteroids (ICSs).
OBJECTIVE: We hypothesized that if the inflammation of the airway wall 
influences to some extent and in some way the PD in asthma patients, ICSs 
reverse the effect of airway inflammation on the PD.
METHODS: We studied 100 asthma patients who were divided into the following four 
groups: patients with obstruction who were either ICS-naive (group I) or were 
treated with ICSs (group II); and nonobstructed patients who were either 
ICS-naive (group III) or were treated with ICSs (group IV). PD on the visual 
analog scale (VAS) was assessed during a methacholine-induced FEV(1) decrease 
and specifically was quantified as the VAS slope and score at an FEV(1) decrease 
of 5 to 20%. BHR was assessed in terms of the provocative concentration of 
methacholine causing a 20% fall in FEV(1) (PC(20)). Eosinophil counts in induced 
sputum samples also were performed. Regression analysis, univariate analysis of 
variance, and factor analysis were applied for statistical evaluation.
RESULTS: For a 5 to 20% fall in FEV(1) from the lowest point after saline 
solution induction, VAS score was lowest in group II, slightly higher in group 
I, slightly higher still in group IV, and the highest in group III. In the 
patients as a whole, BHR related to PD, but age, clinical score, duration of the 
disease, and presence of baseline airway obstruction did not. In patients with 
obstruction who were treated with ICSs, eosinophil counts related to PD 
negatively. Factor analysis yielded the following four factors that accounted 
for 70% of the variance in the data: ICS; eosinophil counts; FEV(1); and PC(20) 
loaded on separated factors with PD loading on the same factors as PC(20). The 
post hoc analysis carried out dividing the patients into ICS-treated and 
ICS-naive, showed that in the former group eosinophil counts and BHR proved to 
be factors negatively associated with PD, while in the latter group eosinophil 
counts were positively associated with PD.
CONCLUSIONS: We have shown that eosinophilic inflammation of the airway wall may 
increase PD and that the association of eosinophil counts with ICSs may result 
in lessening the PD.

DOI: 10.1378/chest.120.3.770
PMID: 11555508 [Indexed for MEDLINE]