1. Ann Oncol. 2002 Nov;13(11):1717-29. doi: 10.1093/annonc/mdf306.

Is first-line single-agent mitoxantrone in the treatment of high-risk metastatic 
breast cancer patients as effective as combination chemotherapy? No difference 
in survival but higher quality of life were found in a multicenter randomized 
trial.

Heidemann E(1), Stoeger H, Souchon R, Hirschmann WD, Bodenstein H, Oberhoff C, 
Fischer JT, Schulze M, Clemens M, Andreesen R, Mahlke M, König M, Scharl A, 
Fehnle K, Kaufmann M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Deaconess Hospital, 
Oncological Center of Stuttgart, Germany. heidemann@diak-stuttgart.de

BACKGROUND: To determine whether patients with high-risk metastatic breast 
cancer draw benefit from combination chemotherapy as first-line treatment.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A total of 260 women with measurable metastatic breast 
cancer fulfilling high-risk criteria, previously untreated with chemotherapy for 
their metastatic disease, were randomized to receive either mitoxantrone 12 
mg/m(2) or the combination of fluorouracil 500 mg/m(2), epirubicin 50 mg/m(2) 
and cyclophosphamide 500 mg/m(2) (FEC) every 3 weeks. Treatment was continued 
until complete remission plus two cycles, or until disease progression. In the 
case of partial remission or stable disease, treatment was stopped after 12 
cycles. Second-line treatment was vindesine, mitomycin and prednisolone. Gain 
from treatment was estimated using a modified Brunner's score composed of time 
to progression, patients' rating of the treatment benefit, alopecia, vomiting 
and performance status.
RESULTS: After recruitment from 1992 to 1997 and observation from 1997 to 1999, 
the final evaluation showed that single-agent treatment with mitoxantrone does 
not differ significantly from combination treatment with FEC in terms of 
response, objective remission rate, remission duration, time to response, time 
to best response, time to progression or overall survival. There was, however, a 
significant difference in gain from treatment using a modified Brunner's score 
favoring the single-agent treatment arm. There was no evidence that any subgroup 
would fare better with combination treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: No significant difference was detected between the treatment with 
mitoxantrone as a single agent and the combination of low-dose FEC in terms of 
response or survival; therefore, the imperative of the necessity of first-line 
combination chemotherapy for patients with high-risk metastatic breast cancer 
may be questioned. Since toxicity and quality of life score favored the 
single-agent mitoxantrone treatment arm, this treatment may be offered to 
patients preferring quality of life to a potential small prolongation of 
survival.

DOI: 10.1093/annonc/mdf306
PMID: 12419743 [Indexed for MEDLINE]