1. BMC Health Serv Res. 2004 May 19;4(1):9. doi: 10.1186/1472-6963-4-9.

Profiling quality of care: Is there a role for peer review?

Hofer TP(1), Asch SM, Hayward RA, Rubenstein LV, Hogan MM, Adams J, Kerr EA.

Author information:
(1)Veterans Affairs Health Services Research and Development Center of 
Excellence, Veterans Affairs Ann Arbor Healthcare System, Michigan, USA. 
thofer@umich.edu

BACKGROUND: We sought to develop a more reliable structured implicit chart 
review instrument for use in assessing the quality of care for chronic disease 
and to examine if ratings are more reliable for conditions in which the evidence 
base for practice is more developed.
METHODS: We conducted a reliability study in a cohort with patient records 
including both outpatient and inpatient care as the objects of measurement. We 
developed a structured implicit review instrument to assess the quality of care 
over one year of treatment. 12 reviewers conducted a total of 496 reviews of 70 
patient records selected from 26 VA clinical sites in two regions of the 
country. Each patient had between one and four conditions specified as having a 
highly developed evidence base (diabetes and hypertension) or a less developed 
evidence base (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease or a collection of acute 
conditions). Multilevel analysis that accounts for the nested and 
cross-classified structure of the data was used to estimate the signal and noise 
components of the measurement of quality and the reliability of implicit review.
RESULTS: For COPD and a collection of acute conditions the reliability of a 
single physician review was quite low (intra-class correlation = 0.16-0.26) but 
comparable to most previously published estimates for the use of this method in 
inpatient settings. However, for diabetes and hypertension the reliability is 
significantly higher at 0.46. The higher reliability is a result of the 
reviewers collectively being able to distinguish more differences in the quality 
of care between patients (p < 0.007) and not due to less random noise or 
individual reviewer bias in the measurement. For these conditions the level of 
true quality (i.e. the rating of quality of care that would result from the full 
population of physician reviewers reviewing a record) varied from poor to good 
across patients.
CONCLUSIONS: For conditions with a well-developed quality of care evidence base, 
such as hypertension and diabetes, a single structured implicit review to assess 
the quality of care over a period of time is moderately reliable. This method 
could be a reasonable complement or alternative to explicit indicator approaches 
for assessing and comparing quality of care. Structured implicit review, like 
explicit quality measures, must be used more cautiously for illnesses for which 
the evidence base is less well developed, such as COPD and acute, short-course 
illnesses.

DOI: 10.1186/1472-6963-4-9
PMCID: PMC434524
PMID: 15151701 [Indexed for MEDLINE]