1. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2004 Oct;13(10):1640-5.

Prostate-specific antigen and free prostate-specific antigen in the early 
detection of prostate cancer: do combination tests improve detection?

Etzioni R(1), Falcon S, Gann PH, Kooperberg CL, Penson DF, Stampfer MJ.

Author information:
(1)Program in Biostatistics, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, 1100 
Fairview Avenue North, M2-B230, Seattle, WA 98109-1024, USA. retzioni@fhcrc.org

BACKGROUND: The combined use of free and total prostate-specific antigen (PSA) 
in early detection of prostate cancer has been controversial. This article 
systematically evaluates the discriminating capacity of a large number of 
combination tests.
METHODS: Free and total PSA were analyzed in stored serum samples taken prior to 
diagnosis in 429 cases and 1,640 controls from the Physicians' Health Study. We 
used a classification algorithm called logic regression to search for clinically 
useful tests combining total and percent free PSA and receiver operating 
characteristic analysis and compared these tests with those based on total and 
complexed PSA. Data were divided into training and test subsets. For robustness, 
we considered 35 test-train splits of the original data and computed receiver 
operating characteristic curves for each test data set.
RESULTS: The average area under the receiver operating characteristic curve 
across test data sets was 0.74 for total PSA and 0.76 for the combination tests. 
Combination tests with higher sensitivity and specificity than PSA > 4.0 ng/mL 
were identified 29 out of 35 times. All these tests extended the PSA reflex 
range to below 4.0 ng/mL. Receiver operating characteristic curve analysis 
indicated that the overall diagnostic performance as expressed by the area under 
the curve did not differ significantly for the different tests.
CONCLUSIONS: Tests combining total and percent free PSA show modest overall 
improvements over total PSA. However, utilization of percent free PSA below a 
PSA threshold of 4 ng/mL could translate into a practically important reduction 
in unnecessary biopsies without sacrificing cancers detected.

PMID: 15466981 [Indexed for MEDLINE]