1. Br J Gen Pract. 2004 Dec;54(509):922-7.

Chronic functional somatic symptoms: a single syndrome?

olde Hartman TC(1), Lucassen PL, van de Lisdonk EH, Bor HH, van Weel C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Family Medicine, University Medical Centre Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands. t.oldehartman@hag.umcn.nl

BACKGROUND: Reliable longitudinal data of patients with functional somatic 
symptoms in general practice are lacking.
AIMS: To identify distinctive features in patients with chronic functional 
somatic symptoms, and to determine whether these symptoms support the hypothesis 
of the existence of specific somatic syndromes.
DESIGN OF STUDY: Observational study, with a comparison control group.
SETTING: Four primary care practices affiliated with the University of Nijmegen 
in the Netherlands.
METHOD: One hundred and eighty-two patients diagnosed between 1998 and 2002 as 
having chronic functional somatic symptoms and 182 controls matched by age, sex, 
socioeconomic status, and practice were included. Data on comorbidity, 
referrals, diagnostic tests, and hospital admissions over a period of 10 years 
prior to the diagnosis were collected. Medication use and number of visits to 
the general practitioner (GP) were extracted from the moment computerised 
registration was started.
RESULTS: In the 10 years before the diagnosis of chronic functional somatic 
symptoms, significantly more patients than controls presented functional somatic 
symptoms in at least two body systems, and used more somatic and psychotropic 
drugs. They visited the GP twice as much, statistically had significantly more 
psychiatric morbidity, and were referred more often to mental health workers and 
somatic specialists. The number of patients undergoing diagnostic tests was 
higher for patients with chronic functional somatic symptoms than for controls, 
but hospital admissions rates were equal.
CONCLUSION: Patients with chronic functional somatic symptoms have a great 
diversity of functional somatic symptoms. They use more somatic and psychotropic 
drugs than controls in the years before diagnosis. Moreover, they show high 
rates of referrals and psychiatric morbidity. The diversity of symptoms of 
patients with chronic functional somatic symptoms supports the concept that 
symptoms do not cluster in well defined distinct syndromes. Therefore, patients 
with chronic functional somatic symptoms should preferably not be classified 
into medical subspecialty syndromes.

PMCID: PMC1326111
PMID: 15588538 [Indexed for MEDLINE]