1. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 2005 Sep;26(8):2122-7.

Percutaneous ethanol injection for benign cystic thyroid nodules: is aspiration 
of ethanol-mixed fluid advantageous?

Kim DW(1), Rho MH, Kim HJ, Kwon JS, Sung YS, Lee SW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Masan Samsung Hospital, Sungkyunkwan University 
School of Medicine, Masan, South Korea.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: We evaluated the differences between percutaneous 
ethanol injection with and without aspiration of ethanol-mixed fluid for 
treatment of benign cystic thyroid nodules.
METHODS: We examined 60 patients with benign cystic thyroid nodules confirmed by 
fine-needle aspiration biopsy and divided them into 2 groups according to 
nonaspiration (group A, n = 30) or aspiration (group B, n = 30) of ethanol-mixed 
fluid after intracystic ethanol injection. We evaluated in both groups the 
complete disappearance of the cystic portion of the thyroid nodule on follow-up 
ultrasonography (first follow-up ultrasonography; mean, 4.6 months in group A; 
mean, 4.4 months in group B) (chi-square test), side effects or complications 
during and after the procedure (chi-square test), and the total procedure time 
(Student t test).
RESULTS: Most patients showed complete disappearance of the cystic portion of 
the thyroid nodule (group A, n = 29; group B, n = 28), and they revealed no 
recurrence on follow-up ultrasonography. There was no statistical difference in 
the success rates between group A and group B (P > .05). Pain, the most common 
side effect, and other mild side effects or complications occurred in small 
numbers of patients in each group, but there was no significant difference in 
side effects or complications between the 2 groups (P > .05), except for 
intracystic hemorrhage (P < .05) and the complaint of all group B patients due 
to a double puncture (P < .001). The total procedure time was nearly double in 
group B than in group A because of the additional procedures, such as complete 
evacuation of the ethanol-mixed fluid and the 10-minute compression.
CONCLUSION: Percutaneous ethanol injection without aspiration of ethanol-mixed 
fluid seems to be the preferable method of treatment of benign cystic thyroid 
nodules from the perspective of both the physician and the patient.

PMCID: PMC8148835
PMID: 16155169 [Indexed for MEDLINE]