1. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2007 Feb 6;49(5):578-86. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2006.09.044. 
Epub 2007 Jan 22.

Stretch-sensitive KCNQ1 mutation A link between genetic and environmental 
factors in the pathogenesis of atrial fibrillation?

Otway R(1), Vandenberg JI, Guo G, Varghese A, Castro ML, Liu J, Zhao J, Bursill 
JA, Wyse KR, Crotty H, Baddeley O, Walker B, Kuchar D, Thorburn C, Fatkin D.

Author information:
(1)Sr. Bernice Research Program in Inherited Heart Diseases, Darlinghurst, New 
South Wales, Australia.

OBJECTIVES: This study sought to evaluate mutations in genes encoding the slow 
component of the cardiac delayed rectifier K+ current (I(Ks)) channel in 
familial atrial fibrillation (AF).
BACKGROUND: Although AF can have a genetic etiology, links between inherited 
gene defects and acquired factors such as atrial stretch have not been explored.
METHODS: Mutation screening of the KCNQ1, KCNE1, KCNE2, and KCNE3 genes was 
performed in 50 families with AF. The effects of mutant protein on cardiac I(Ks) 
activation were evaluated using electrophysiological studies and human atrial 
action potential modeling.
RESULTS: One missense KCNQ1 mutation, R14C, was identified in 1 family with a 
high prevalence of hypertension. Atrial fibrillation was present only in older 
individuals who had developed atrial dilation and who were genotype positive. 
Patch-clamp studies of wild-type or R14C KCNQ1 expressed with KCNE1 in CHO cells 
showed no statistically significant differences between wild-type and mutant 
channel kinetics at baseline, or after activation of adenylate cyclase with 
forskolin. After exposure to hypotonic solution to elicit cell swelling/stretch, 
mutant channels showed a marked increase in current, a leftward shift in the 
voltage dependence of activation, altered channel kinetics, and shortening of 
the modeled atrial action potential duration.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that the R14C KCNQ1 mutation alone is 
insufficient to cause AF. Rather, we suggest a model in which a "second hit", 
such as an environmental factor like hypertension, which promotes atrial stretch 
and thereby unmasks an inherited defect in ion channel kinetics (the "first 
hit"), is required for AF to be manifested. Such a model would also account for 
the age-related increase in AF development.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jacc.2006.09.044
PMID: 17276182 [Indexed for MEDLINE]