1. J Manag Care Pharm. 2008 May;14(4 Suppl):S3-6. doi: 
10.18553/jmcp.2008.14.s4-a.3.

The promise of specialty pharmaceuticals: are they worth the price?

Sullivan SD(1).

Author information:
(1)Pharmaceutical Outcomes Research and Policy Program, University of 
Washington, Seattle, WA 98195-7630, USA. sdsull@u.washington.edu

BACKGROUND: Specialty pharmaceuticals have evolved beyond their status as niche 
drugs designed to treat rare conditions and are now poised to become the 
standard of care in a wide variety of common chronic illnesses. Due in part to 
the cost of these therapies, payers are increasingly demanding evidence of their 
value. Determining the value of these medications is hampered by a lack of 
robust pharmacoeconomic data.
OBJECTIVE: To outline emerging strategies and case study examples for the 
medical and pharmacy benefits management of specialty pharmaceuticals.
SUMMARY: The promise of specialty pharmaceuticals: increased life expectancy, 
improved quality of life, enhanced workplace productivity, decreased burden of 
disease, and reduced health care spending comes at a significant cost. These 
agents require special handling, administration, patient education, clinical 
support, and risk mitigation. Additionally, specialty drugs require distribution 
systems that ensure appropriate patient selection and data collection. With the 
specialty pharmaceutical pipeline overflowing with new medicines and an aging 
population increasingly relying on these novel treatments to treat common 
diseases, the challenge of managing the costs associated with these agents can 
be daunting. Aided by sophisticated pharmacoeconomic models to assess value, the 
cost impacts of these specialty drugs can be appropriately controlled.
CONCLUSION: Current evidence suggests that when used in targeted patient 
populations, specialty pharmaceuticals may represent a good health care value.

DOI: 10.18553/jmcp.2008.14.s4-a.3
PMCID: PMC10438149
PMID: 18507507 [Indexed for MEDLINE]