1. Inform Prim Care. 2008;16(1):3-8. doi: 10.14236/jhi.v16i1.669.

Do general practice characteristics influence uptake of an information 
technology (IT) innovation in primary care?

Evans JM(1), Guthrie B, Pagliari C, Greene A, Morris AD, Cunningham S, Donnan 
PT.

Author information:
(1)Lecturer in Epidemiology, Division of Community Health Sciences, University 
of Dundee, Scotland. j.m.m.stansfield@chs.dundee.ac.uk

INTRODUCTION: Recent evaluations of IT innovations in primary care have 
highlighted variations between centres and practices in uptake and use. We 
evaluated whether structural characteristics of a general practice were 
associated with variations in use of a web-based clinical information system 
underpinning a Managed Clinical Network in diabetes, between the years 2001 and 
2003.
METHODS: Using a computerised audit trail, we calculated the numbers of 
web-based operations that occurred in each practice, stratified by staff type 
and year, and adjusted for the numbers of registered diabetic patients. In 
regression analyses, we determined whether total use was associated with 
structural characteristics of the practice (total list size, training status, 
numbers of GPs (general practitioners), mean age of the GPs, numbers of female 
GPs, level of deprivation of the population and whether staff had received 
advanced training in diabetes care).
RESULTS: Initially there were a few practices which made very frequent use of 
the information system, with relatively high numbers of practices using the 
facility infrequently. However, overall use gradually became more evenly spread. 
This effect was particularly evident among nurse users. Frequent use by GPs was 
evident in only a small number of practices, with mean GP use decreasing over 
the three years. In linear regression analyses, none of the general practice 
variables were associated with online use, either overall or stratified by staff 
type, except for the numbers of diabetes-educated staff. This was consistently 
associated with increased use by nurses and GPs.
CONCLUSIONS: The analyses show that structural characteristics of a practice are 
not associated with uptake of a new IT facility, but that its use may be 
influenced by post-graduate education in the relevant clinical condition. For 
this diabetes system at least, practice nurse use was critical in spreading 
uptake beyond initial GP enthusiasts and for sustained and rising use in 
subsequent years.

DOI: 10.14236/jhi.v16i1.669
PMID: 18534072 [Indexed for MEDLINE]