1. Aging Clin Exp Res. 2008 Jun;20(3):266-71. doi: 10.1007/BF03324777.

Do older patients who refuse to participate in a self-management intervention in 
the Netherlands differ from older patients who agree to participate?

Elzen H(1), Slaets JP, Snijders TA, Steverink N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Geriatrics, University Medical Center 
Groningen, University of Groningen, 9700 RB Groningen, The Netherlands. 
h.a.elzen@int.umcg.nl

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Refusal of patients to participate in intervention programs 
is an important problem in clinical trials but, in general, researchers devote 
relatively little attention to it. In this article, a comparison is made between 
patients who, after having been invited, agreed to participate in a 
self-management intervention (participants) and those who refused (refusers). 
Compared with other studies of refusers, relatively more information could be 
gathered with regard to both their characteristics and reasons for refusing, 
because all potential participants were invited personally.
METHODS: Older patients from a Dutch outpatient clinic were invited to 
participate in a self-management intervention, and their characteristics were 
assessed. Demographic data were collected, as well as data on physical 
functioning and lack of emotional support. People who refused to participate 
were asked to give their reasons for refusing.
RESULTS: Of the 361 patients invited, 267 (74%) refused participation. These 
refusers were more restricted in their mobility, lived further away from the 
location of the intervention, and had a partner more often than did the 
participants. No differences were found in level of education, age or gender. 
The main reasons given by respondents for refusing to participate were lack of 
time, travel distance, and transport problems.
CONCLUSIONS: As in many studies, the refusal rate in this study is high, and 
seems to be related to physical mobility restrictions, travel distance and, 
partly, to availability of emotional support. These findings may be used to make 
the recruitment process more effective - for example, by offering transport to 
the location of the intervention.

DOI: 10.1007/BF03324777
PMID: 18594195 [Indexed for MEDLINE]