1. Psychol Med. 2009 May;39(5):763-71. doi: 10.1017/S0033291708004078. Epub 2008 
Jul 30.

Do risk factors for suicidal behavior differ by affective disorder polarity?

Fiedorowicz JG(1), Leon AC, Keller MB, Solomon DA, Rice JP, Coryell WH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Roy J. and Lucille A. Carver College of Medicine, 
University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA. 
jess-fiedorowicz@uiowa.edu

BACKGROUND: Suicide is a leading cause of death and has been strongly associated 
with affective disorders. The influence of affective disorder polarity on 
subsequent suicide attempts or completions and any differential effect of 
suicide risk factors by polarity were assessed in a prospective cohort.
METHOD: Participants with major affective disorders in the National Institute of 
Mental Health (NIMH) Collaborative Depression Study (CDS) were followed 
prospectively for up to 25 years. A total of 909 participants meeting 
prospective diagnostic criteria for major depressive and bipolar disorders were 
followed through 4204 mood cycles. Suicidal behavior was defined as suicide 
attempts or completions. Mixed-effects, grouped-time survival analysis assessed 
risk of suicidal behavior and differential effects of risk factors for suicidal 
behavior by polarity. In addition to polarity, the main effects of age, gender, 
hopelessness, married status, prior suicide attempts and active substance abuse 
were modeled, with mood cycle as the unit of analysis.
RESULTS: After controlling for age of onset, there were no differences in prior 
suicide attempts by polarity although bipolar participants had more prior severe 
attempts. During follow-up, 40 cycles ended in suicide and 384 cycles contained 
at least one suicide attempt. Age, hopelessness and active substance abuse but 
not polarity predicted suicidal behavior. The effects of risk factors did not 
differ by polarity.
CONCLUSIONS: Bipolarity does not independently influence risk of suicidal 
behavior or alter the influence of well-established suicide risk factors within 
affective disorders. Suicide risk assessment strategies may continue to appraise 
these common risk factors without regard to mood polarity.

DOI: 10.1017/S0033291708004078
PMCID: PMC2775816
PMID: 18667100 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interest Dr. Fiedorowicz is 
supported by L30 MH075180-02, the Nellie Ball Trust Research Fund, and a NARSAD 
Young Investigator Award. He has further received support for participating in a 
colleague’s investigator-initiated study with Eli Lilly. Dr. Leon has served as 
a consultant to the National Institute of Mental Health and Food and Drug 
Administration and as a member of Data and Safety Monitoring Boards for Pfizer, 
Organon, and Dainippon Sumitomo Pharma America. Dr. Keller has served as a 
consultant or received honoraria from Collegium, Cypress Bioscience, Cyberonics, 
Eli Lilly, Forest Laboratories, Janssen, Organon, Otsuka, Pfizer, Pharmastar, 
Sepracor, Vela Pharmaceuticals, Wyeth Pharmaceuticals. He has received grants 
from Eli Lilly, Pfizer, and Wyeth Pharmaceuticals. He has served on advisory 
boards for Abbott Laboratories, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Cyberonics, Cypress 
Bioscience, Eli Lilly, Forest Laboratories, GlaxoSmithKline, Janssen, Novartis, 
Organon, Pfizer, Sepracor, and Wyeth Pharmaceuticals. Dr. Solomon has served as 
an investigator for research funded by Jansenn Pharmaceutica, as a consultant to 
Solvay Pharmaceuticals, Shire, and Novartis, and has served on the lecture 
bureaus of AstraZeneca, Pfizer, GlaxoSmithKline, and Shire. Dr. Rice is listed 
as an inventor on a patent (US 20070258898) held by Perlegen Sciences, Inc., 
covering the use of certain single nucleotide polymorphisms in determining the 
diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment of addiction. All other authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest.