1. J Health Serv Res Policy. 2009 Jan;14(1):35-43. doi:
10.1258/jhsrp.2008.007065.

Are home sampling kits for sexually transmitted infections acceptable among men 
who have sex with men?

Llewellyn C(1), Pollard A, Smith H, Fisher M; Home Sampling Kit Study Group.

Author information:
(1)Division of Public Health & Primary Care, Brighton & Sussex Medical School, 
Brighton. c.d.llewellyn@bsms.ac.uk

OBJECTIVE: There is an urgent need to increase opportunistic screening for 
sexually transmitted infections (STIs) in community settings, particularly for 
those who are at increased risk including men who have sex with men (MSM). The 
aim of this qualitative study was to explore whether home sampling kits (HSK) 
for multiple bacterial STIs are potentially acceptable among MSM and to identify 
any concerns regarding their use. This study was developed as part of a 
formative evaluation of HSKs.
METHODS: Focus groups and one-to-one semi-structured interviews with MSM were 
conducted. Focus group participants (n = 20) were shown a variety of 
self-sampling materials and asked to discuss them. Individual interviewees (n = 
24) had experience of the self-sampling techniques as part of a pilot clinical 
study. All data were digitally recorded and transcribed verbatim. Data were 
analysed using a framework analysis approach.
RESULTS: The concept of a HSK was generally viewed as positive, with many 
benefits identified relating to increased access to testing, enhanced personal 
comfort and empowerment. Concerns about the accuracy of the test, delays in 
receiving the results, the possible lack of support and potential negative 
impact on 'others' were raised.
CONCLUSION: The widespread acceptability of using HSKs for the diagnosis of STIs 
could have important public health impacts in terms of earlier diagnosis of 
asymptomatic infections and thus a decrease in the rate of onward transmission. 
In addition, HSKs could potentially optimize the use of genitourinary medicine 
services and facilitate patient choice.

DOI: 10.1258/jhsrp.2008.007065
PMID: 19103915 [Indexed for MEDLINE]