1. Turk Kardiyol Dern Ars. 2008 Oct;36(7):446-50.

[Does accompanying metabolic syndrome contribute to heart dimensions in 
hypertensive patients?].

[Article in Turkish]

Uzun M(1), Köz C, Yildirim M, Kirilmaz A, Yokuşoğlu M, Kiliçaslan F, Ulusoy E, 
Baysan O, Sağ C, Cebeci BS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Haydarpaşa Training Hospital, Gülhane Military 
Medical School, Istanbul, Turkey.

OBJECTIVES: Metabolic syndrome (MetS) is associated with increased risk for 
cardiovascular events. We evaluated heart dimensions in hypertensive patients 
with MetS.
STUDY DESIGN: The study included 75 hypertensive patients (34 males, 41 females; 
mean age 51+/-9 years) without coronary artery disease. Patients were evaluated 
in two groups depending on the presence or absence of MetS. Age- and 
gender-matched 20 healthy subjects (9 males, 11 females; mean age 50+/-5 years) 
comprised the control group. The diagnosis of MetS was based on the presence of 
at least three of five MetS criteria. Hypertension was defined as arterial blood 
pressure exceeding 140/85 mmHg on three consecutive measurements or the use of 
antihypertensive drugs. Echocardiographic measurements included interventricular 
septal thickness, left ventricular internal diameter, posterior wall thickness, 
aortic diameter, left atrial diameter, relative wall thickness, and left 
ventricular mass.
RESULTS: Metabolic syndrome was present in 32 hypertensive patients (42.7%; 18 
males, 14 females). The mean number of MetS criteria was 2.6+/-1.0 in the 
hypertensive group. Compared to the control group, patients with or without MetS 
exhibited significantly increased interventricular septum and posterior wall 
thickness, left atrial diameter, relative wall thickness, and left ventricular 
mass (p<0.05). The only significant difference between the two patient groups 
was that MetS was associated with a greater left atrial diameter (p=0.019). Left 
atrial diameter was correlated with the number of MetS criteria (r=0.51; 
p<0.001).
CONCLUSION: Left ventricular dimensions are not influenced by MetS. Rather than 
MetS, hypertension is primarily responsible for changes in left ventricular 
dimensions. However, left atrial enlargement is more prominent in patients with 
MetS, suggesting that each MetS criterion contributes to left ventricular 
diastolic dysfunction.

PMID: 19155657 [Indexed for MEDLINE]