1. Traffic Inj Prev. 2009 Aug;10(4):340-7. doi: 10.1080/15389580903043446.

Could ESC (Electronic Stability Control) change the way we drive?

Rudin-Brown CM(1), Jenkins RW, Whitehead T, Burns PC.

Author information:
(1)Ergonomics and Crash Avoidance Division, Standards and Research Branch, Road 
Safety and Motor Vehicle Regulation Directorate, Transport Canada, Ontario, 
Canada. missy.rudinbrown@muarc.monash.edu.au

OBJECTIVE: ESC (Electronic Stability Control) is a crash avoidance technology 
that reduces the likelihood of collisions involving loss of control. Although 
past and emerging research indicates that ESC is effective in reducing collision 
rates and saving lives, and its inclusion in all vehicle platforms is 
encouraged, drivers may demonstrate behavioral adaptation or an overreliance on 
ESC that could offset or reduce its overall effectiveness. The main objective of 
the present study was to determine whether behavioral adaptation to ESC is 
likely to occur upon the widespread introduction of ESC into the Canadian 
vehicle fleet. Secondary objectives were to confirm the results of a previous 
ESC public survey and to generate a baseline measure for the future assessment 
of planned and ongoing ESC promotional activities in Canada.
METHODS: Two separate telephone surveys evaluated drivers' perceptions and 
awareness of ESC. The first surveyed 500 randomly selected owners/drivers of 
passenger vehicles. The second surveyed 1017 owners/drivers of 2006-2008 
ESC-equipped passenger vehicles from the provinces of Quebec and British 
Columbia, Canada.
RESULTS: Though ESC drivers were much more likely than drivers of other vehicles 
to be aware of ESC (77% vs. 39%) and that their own vehicle was equipped with it 
(63% vs. 8%), 23 percent had never heard of it. Ninety percent of drivers who 
knew that their vehicle was equipped with ESC believed that ESC had made it 
safer to drive and reported being confident that ESC would work in an emergency. 
Twenty-three percent of ESC owners who knew their vehicle had ESC reported 
noticing long-lasting changes in their driving behavior since they began driving 
the vehicle.
CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, results suggest that behavioral adaptation to ESC is 
likely in certain drivers; however, its proven effectiveness in reducing the 
likelihood of being involved in a serious crash probably outweighs any potential 
increases in unsafe driving. To fully benefit from ESC, vehicle manufacturers 
are encouraged to market ESC-equipped vehicles in a realistic, safe manner. 
Driver training and safety organizations are also encouraged to provide balanced 
educational information about ESC to their members.

DOI: 10.1080/15389580903043446
PMID: 19593710 [Indexed for MEDLINE]