1. RETRACTED ARTICLE

J Pak Med Assoc. 2009 Aug;59(8):550-4.

Is Chaalia/Pan Masala harmful for health? practices and knowledge of children of 
schools in Mahmoodabad and Chanesar Goth, Karachi.

Shah S(1), Qureshi R, Azam I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Family Medicine, Aga Khan University and Hospital, Stadium 
Road, Karachi.

Retraction in
    J Pak Med Assoc. 2010 Jun;60(6):515.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the practices and knowledge of harmful effects regarding 
use of Chaalia and Pan Masala in three schools of Mahmoodabad and Chanesar Goth, 
Jamshed Town, Karachi, Pakistan.
METHODS: To achieve the objective a cross-sectional design was used in three 
government schools of Mahmoodabad and Chanesar Goth, Jamshed Town, Karachi. 
Students of either gender drawn from these schools fulfilling the inclusion and 
exclusion criteria were interviewed using a pre-coded structured questionnaire. 
Along with demographic data, questions regarding frequency of Chaalia and Pan 
Masala use, practices of this habit in friends and family and place of 
procurement of these substances, were inquired. Knowledge was assessed about 
harmful effects and its source of information. In addition, practices in 
relation to that knowledge were assessed.
RESULTS: A total of 370 students were interviewed over a period of six weeks, of 
which 205 (55.4%) were boys. The ages of the students were between 10 and 15 
years. Thirty one percent of the fathers and 62% of the mothers were uneducated. 
The frequency of use of any brand of Chaalia was found to be 94% and that of Pan 
Masala was 73.8%. Eighty five percent of them were regular users. A large 
majority (88%) procured the substances themselves from near their homes. Ninety 
five percent of the children had friends with the same habits. Eighty four 
percent were using the substances in full knowledge of their families. Chaalia 
was considered harmful for health by 96% and Pan Masala by 60%. Good taste was 
cited as a reason for continuing the habit by 88.5% of the children and use by 
friends by 57%. Knowledge about established harmful effects was variable. 
Knowledge about harmful effects was high in both "daily" and "less than daily 
users".
CONCLUSION: The frequency of habits of Chaalia and Pan Masala chewing, by school 
children in lower socio-economic areas is extremely high. The probable reasons 
for this high frequency are taste, the widespread use of these substances by 
family members and friends, low cost and easy availability.

PMID: 19757704 [Indexed for MEDLINE]