1. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2009 Dec;103(6):508-14. doi: 
10.1016/S1081-1206(10)60268-2.

Biomolecular identification of allergenic pollen: a new perspective for 
aerobiological monitoring?

Longhi S(1), Cristofori A, Gatto P, Cristofolini F, Grando MS, Gottardini E.

Author information:
(1)IASMA Research and Innovation Centre, Fondazione Edmund Mach, Trento, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Accurate and updated information on airborne pollen in specific 
areas can help allergic patients. Current monitoring systems are based on a 
morphologic identification approach, a time-consuming method that may represent 
a limiting factor for sampling network enhancement.
OBJECTIVE: To verify the feasibility of developing a real-time polymerase chain 
reaction (PCR) approach, an alternative to optical analysis, as a rapid, 
accurate, and automated tool for the detection and quantification of airborne 
allergenic pollen taxa.
METHODS: The traditional cetyl trimethyl ammonium bromide-based method was 
modified for DNA isolation from pollen. Taxon-specific DNA sequences were 
identified via bioinformatics or literature searches and were PCR amplified from 
the matching allergenic taxa; based on the sequences of PCR products, 
complementary or degenerate TaqMan probes were developed. The accuracy of the 
quantitative real-time PCR assay was tested on 3 plant species.
RESULTS: The setup of a modified DNA extraction protocol allowed us to achieve 
good-quality pollen DNA. Taxon-specific nuclear gene fragments were identified 
and sequenced. Designed primer pairs and probes identified selected pollen taxa, 
mostly at the required classification level. Pollen was properly identified even 
when collected on routine aerobiological tape. Preliminary quantification assays 
on pollen grains were successfully performed on test species and in mixes.
CONCLUSIONS: The real-time PCR approach revealed promising results in pollen 
identification and quantification, even when analyzing pollen mixes. Future 
perspectives could concern the development of multiplex real-time PCR for the 
simultaneous detection of different taxa in the same reaction tube and the 
application of high-throughput molecular methods.

DOI: 10.1016/S1081-1206(10)60268-2
PMID: 20084845 [Indexed for MEDLINE]