1. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2010 Apr;91(4):589-95. doi: 10.1016/j.apmr.2009.11.026.

Knee extensor strength, dynamic stability, and functional ambulation: are they 
related in Parkinson's disease?

Nocera JR(1), Buckley T, Waddell D, Okun MS, Hass CJ.

Author information:
(1)Brain Rehabilitation Research Center, Malcom Randall Veterans Affairs Medical 
Center, Gainesville, FL, USA. jnocera@ufl.edu

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the relationship between knee extensor strength, postural 
stability, functional ambulation, and disease severity in Parkinson's disease 
(PD).
DESIGN: A cohort study.
SETTING: University research laboratory.
PARTICIPANTS: Patients (N=44) with idiopathic PD.
INTERVENTION: Not applicable.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Participants were evaluated on their isokinetic knee 
extensor strength. Additionally, participants completed an assessment of their 
postural stability (Functional Reach Test for static stability and a dynamic 
postural stability assessment as measured by the center of pressure-center of 
mass moment arm during gait initiation). Participants also underwent an 
evaluation of their functional ambulation as measured by a 6-minute walk test. 
Lastly, participants were evaluated by a neurologist specially trained in 
movement disorders to assess neurologic status and disease severity using the 
Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale and the Hoehn and Yahr disability 
score.
RESULTS: Knee extensor strength positively correlated with dynamic postural 
stability and negatively correlated with disease severity. Further, dynamic 
postural stability was negatively correlated to disease severity and positively 
correlated with functional ambulation in this cohort of patients with PD 
(P<.05). The results also suggest that the Functional Reach Test may be a 
valuable assessment tool to examine postural stability in PD.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest a malleable relationship between knee 
extensor strength, dynamic stability, and disease severity in PD. Although 
strength is only one piece of the puzzle in the functional outcome of PD, these 
findings may assist clinicians in designing appropriate interventions aimed at 
increasing function and decreasing fall risk in PD.

Copyright 2010 American Congress of Rehabilitation Medicine. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.apmr.2009.11.026
PMCID: PMC3607197
PMID: 20382292 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No commercial party having a direct financial 
interest in the results of the research supporting this article has or will 
confer a benefit on the authors or on any organization with which the authors 
are associated.