1. Neurosurg Focus. 2010 Jul;29(1):E8. doi: 10.3171/2010.3.FOCUS1072.

A patient with myelomeningocele: is untethering necessary prior to scoliosis 
correction?

Samdani AF(1), Fine AL, Sagoo SS, Shah SC, Cahill PJ, Clements DH, Betz RR.

Author information:
(1)Shriners Hospital for Children, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19140, USA. 
amersamdani@yahoo.com

OBJECT: Tethering of the spinal cord is thought to increase the chance of 
neurological injury when scoliosis correction is undertaken. All patients with 
myelomeningocele (MM) are radiographically tethered, and untethering procedures 
carry significant morbidity risks including worsening neurological function and 
wound complications. No guidelines exist as regards untethering in patients with 
MM prior to scoliosis correction surgery. The authors' aim in this study was to 
evaluate their experience in patients with MM who were not untethered before 
scoliosis correction.
METHODS: Seventeen patients with MM were retrospectively identified and 1) had 
no evidence of a clinically symptomatic tethered cord, 2) had undergone spinal 
fusion for scoliosis correction, and 3) had not been untethered for at least 1 
year prior to surgery. The minimum follow-up after fusion was 2 years. Charts 
and radiographs were reviewed for neurological or shunt complications in the 
perioperative period.
RESULTS: The average age of the patients was 12.4 years, and the following 
neurological levels were affected: T-12 and above, 7 patients; L-1/L-2, 6 
patients; L-3, 2 patients; and L-4, 2 patients. All were radiographically 
tethered as confirmed on MR imaging. Fourteen of the patients (82%) had a 
ventriculoperitoneal shunt. The mean Cobb angle was corrected from 82 degrees to 
35 degrees , for a 57% correction. All patients underwent neuromonitoring of 
their upper extremities, and some underwent lower extremity monitoring as well. 
Postoperatively, no patient experienced a new cranial nerve palsy, shunt 
malfunction, change in urological function, or upper extremity weakness/sensory 
loss. One patient had transient lower extremity weakness, which returned to 
baseline within 1 month of surgery.
CONCLUSIONS: The study results suggested that spinal cord untethering may be 
unnecessary in patients with MM who are undergoing scoliosis corrective surgery 
and do not present with clinical symptoms of a tethered cord, even though 
tethering is radiographically demonstrated.

DOI: 10.3171/2010.3.FOCUS1072
PMID: 20594006 [Indexed for MEDLINE]