1. Int J Health Geogr. 2010 Jul 5;9:35. doi: 10.1186/1476-072X-9-35.

Identification of racial disparities in breast cancer mortality: does scale 
matter?

Tian N(1), Goovaerts P, Zhan FB, Wilson JG.

Author information:
(1)Texas Center for Geographic Information Science, Department of Geography, 
Texas State University-San Marcos, San Marcos, Texas 78666, USA. 
jt1277@txstate.edu

BACKGROUND: This paper investigates the impact of geographic scale (census 
tract, zip code, and county) on the detection of disparities in breast cancer 
mortality among three ethnic groups in Texas (period 1995-2005). Racial 
disparities were quantified using both relative (RR) and absolute (RD) 
statistics that account for the population size and correct for unreliable rates 
typically observed for minority groups and smaller geographic units. Results 
were then correlated with socio-economic status measured by the percentage of 
habitants living below the poverty level.
RESULTS: African-American and Hispanic women generally experience higher 
mortality than White non-Hispanics, and these differences are especially 
significant in the southeast metropolitan areas and southwest border of Texas. 
The proportion and location of significant racial disparities however changed 
depending on the type of statistic (RR versus RD) and the geographic level. The 
largest proportion of significant results was observed for the RD statistic and 
census tract data. Geographic regions with significant racial disparities for 
African-Americans and Hispanics frequently had a poverty rate above 10.00%.
CONCLUSIONS: This study investigates both relative and absolute racial 
disparities in breast cancer mortality between White non-Hispanic and 
African-American/Hispanic women at the census tract, zip code and county levels. 
Analysis at the census tract level generally led to a larger proportion of 
geographical units experiencing significantly higher mortality rates for 
minority groups, although results varied depending on the use of the relative 
versus absolute statistics. Additional research is needed before general 
conclusions can be formulated regarding the choice of optimal geographic regions 
for the detection of racial disparities.

DOI: 10.1186/1476-072X-9-35
PMCID: PMC2910022
PMID: 20602784 [Indexed for MEDLINE]