1. Eur J Cancer. 2011 Mar;47(5):713-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2010.12.020. Epub 2011
 Jan 20.

Does pain intensity predict a poor opioid response in cancer patients?

Mercadante S(1), Gebbia V, David F, Aielli F, Verna L, Porzio G, Ferrera P, 
Casuccio A, Ficorella C.

Author information:
(1)Pain Relief and Palliative Care Unit, La Maddalena Cancer Center, Italy. 
terapiadeldolore@lamaddalenanet.it

AIM: The aim of this study was to test the hypothesis that initial pain 
intensity is not a predictive factor of poor opioid response in advanced cancer 
patients, as suggested by a recent work.
METHODS: A secondary analysis of one-hundred-sixty-seven patients referred for 
treatment of cancer-related pain was conducted. Pain intensity at admission was 
recorded and patients were divided in three categories of pain intensity: mild, 
moderate and severe. Patients were offered a treatment with opioid dose 
titration, according to department policy. Data regarding opioid doses and pain 
intensity were collected after dose titration was completed. Four levels of 
opioid response were considered: (a) good pain control, with minimal opioid 
escalation and without relevant adverse effects; (b) good pain control requiring 
more aggressive opioid escalation, for example doubling the doses in four days; 
(c) adequate pain control associated with the occurrence of adverse effects; (d) 
poor pain control with adverse effects.
RESULTS: Seventy-six, forty-four, forty-one and six patients showed a response 
a, b, c, and d, respectively. No correlation between baseline pain intensity 
categories and opioid response was found. Patients with response 'b' and 'd' 
showed higher values of OEImg.
CONCLUSION: Baseline pain intensity does not predict the outcome after an 
appropriate opioid titration. It is likely that non-homogeneous pain treatment 
would have biased the outcome of a previous work.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejca.2010.12.020
PMID: 21256734 [Indexed for MEDLINE]