1. J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2011 Sep;69(9):2305-10. doi:
10.1016/j.joms.2011.02.014.  Epub 2011 May 7.

Can autologous platelet-rich plasma gel enhance healing after surgical 
extraction of mandibular third molars?

Ogundipe OK(1), Ugboko VI, Owotade FJ.

Author information:
(1)Dental Services Department, Federal Medical Centre, OWO, Nigeria. 
olufemikola@yahoo.co.uk

PURPOSE: This investigation assesses the effect of platelet-rich plasma (PRP) 
gel on postoperative pain, swelling, and trismus as well as healing and bone 
regeneration potential on mandibular third molar extraction sockets.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A prospective randomized comparative clinical study was 
undertaken over a 2-year period. Patients requiring surgical extraction of a 
single impacted third molar and who fell within the inclusion criteria and 
indicated willingness to return for recall visits were recruited. The predictor 
variable was application of PRP gel to the socket of the third molar in the test 
group, whereas the control group had no PRP. The outcome variables were pain, 
swelling, and maximum mouth opening, which were measured using a 10-point visual 
analog scale, tape, and millimeter caliper, respectively. Socket healing was 
assessed radiographically by allocating scores for lamina dura, overall density, 
and trabecular pattern. Quantitative data were presented as mean. Mann-Whitney 
test was used to compare means between groups for continuous variables, whereas 
Fischer exact test was used for categorical variables. Statistical significance 
was inferred at P < .05.
RESULTS: Sixty patients aged 19 to 35 years (mean: 24.7 ± 3.6 years) were 
divided into both test and control groups of 30 patients each. The mean 
postoperative pain score (visual analog scale) was lower for the PRP group at 
all time points and this was statistically significant (P < .05). Although the 
figures for swelling and interincisal mouth opening were lower in the test 
group, this difference was not statistically significant. Similarly, the scores 
for lamina dura, trabecular pattern, and bone density were better among patients 
in the PRP group. This difference was also not statistically significant.
CONCLUSION: The PRP group recorded reduced pain, swelling, and trismus as well 
as enhanced and faster bone healing compared with those in the control. Hence 
the study showed that topical application of PRP gel has a beneficial effect in 
enhancing socket healing after third molar surgery.

Copyright © 2011 American Association of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons. 
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.joms.2011.02.014
PMID: 21550158 [Indexed for MEDLINE]