1. Int J Health Geogr. 2011 May 12;10:33. doi: 10.1186/1476-072X-10-33.

Does context matter for the relationship between deprivation and all-cause 
mortality? The West vs. the rest of Scotland.

Sridharan S(1), Koschinsky J, Walker JJ.

Author information:
(1)The Evaluation Centre for Complex Health Interventions, Keenan Research 
Centre in the Li Ka Shing Knowledge Institute of St. Michael's Hospital and 
University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

BACKGROUND: A growing body of research emphasizes the importance of contextual 
factors on health outcomes. Using postcode sector data for Scotland (UK), this 
study tests the hypothesis of spatial heterogeneity in the relationship between 
area-level deprivation and mortality to determine if contextual differences in 
the West vs. the rest of Scotland influence this relationship. Research into 
health inequalities frequently fails to recognise spatial heterogeneity in the 
deprivation-health relationship, assuming that global relationships apply 
uniformly across geographical areas. In this study, exploratory spatial data 
analysis methods are used to assess local patterns in deprivation and mortality. 
Spatial regression models are then implemented to examine the relationship 
between deprivation and mortality more formally.
RESULTS: The initial exploratory spatial data analysis reveals concentrations of 
high standardized mortality ratios (SMR) and deprivation (hotspots) in the West 
of Scotland and concentrations of low values (coldspots) for both variables in 
the rest of the country. The main spatial regression result is that deprivation 
is the only variable that is highly significantly correlated with all-cause 
mortality in all models. However, in contrast to the expected spatial 
heterogeneity in the deprivation-mortality relationship, this relation does not 
vary between regions in any of the models. This result is robust to a number of 
specifications, including weighting for population size, controlling for spatial 
autocorrelation and heteroskedasticity, assuming a non-linear relationship 
between mortality and socio-economic deprivation, separating the dependent 
variable into male and female SMRs, and distinguishing between West, North and 
Southeast regions. The rejection of the hypothesis of spatial heterogeneity in 
the relationship between socio-economic deprivation and mortality complements 
prior research on the stability of the deprivation-mortality relationship over 
time.
CONCLUSIONS: The homogeneity we found in the deprivation-mortality relationship 
across the regions of Scotland and the absence of a contextualized effect of 
region highlights the importance of taking a broader strategic policy that can 
combat the toxic impacts of socio-economic deprivation on health. Focusing on a 
few specific places (e.g. 15% of the poorest areas) to concentrate resources 
might be a good start but the impact of socio-economic deprivation on mortality 
is not restricted to a few places. A comprehensive strategy that can be 
sustained over time might be needed to interrupt the linkages between poverty 
and mortality.

DOI: 10.1186/1476-072X-10-33
PMCID: PMC3103414
PMID: 21569408 [Indexed for MEDLINE]