1. J Altern Complement Med. 2011 Jul;17(7):655-9. doi: 10.1089/acm.2010.0436.
Epub  2011 Jun 20.

Can dogs prime autistic children for therapy? Evidence from a single case study.

Silva K(1), Correia R, Lima M, Magalhães A, de Sousa L.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Ciências do Comportamento, Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas 
Abel Salazar, Porto, Portugal. karine_silva_24@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Canine-assisted therapy has been receiving growing 
attention as a means of aiding children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). 
Yet, only limited studies have been done and a great deal of literature related 
to this intervention is anecdotal. The present study aims at providing 
additional quantitative evidence on the potential of dogs to positively modulate 
the behavior of children with ASD.
SETTINGS/LOCATION, SUBJECTS, AND INTERVENTIONS: A 12-year-old boy diagnosed with 
ASD was exposed, at his usual treatment location (the Portuguese Association for 
Developmental Disorders and Autism at Vila Nova de Gaia, Portugal), to the 
following treatment conditions: (1) one-to-one structured activities with a 
therapist assisted by a certified therapy dog, and (2) one-to-one structured 
activities with the same therapist alone (as a control). To accurately assess 
differences in the behavior of the participant between these treatment 
conditions, the therapist followed a strict research protocol. The behavior of 
the participant was continuously video-recorded during both treatment conditions 
for further analysis and comparison. Treatment outcomes: In the presence of the 
dog, the participant exhibited more frequent and longer durations of positive 
behaviors (such as smiling and positive physical contacting) as well as less 
frequent and shorter durations of negative behaviors (such as aggressive 
manifestations).
CONCLUSIONS: These findings are in accordance with previous experimental work 
and provide additional support for the assertion that dogs can prime autistic 
children for therapy. Ultimately, this study may contribute toward a change for 
full acceptance of canine-assisted therapy programs within the medical milieu. 
Additional studies using a similar research protocol on more autistic children 
will certainly help professionals to work on the most effective methods to 
individually serve this population through canine-assisted interventions.

DOI: 10.1089/acm.2010.0436
PMID: 21689015 [Indexed for MEDLINE]