1. BMC Neurosci. 2011 Jul 29;12:76. doi: 10.1186/1471-2202-12-76.

The effect of an intracerebroventricular injection of metformin or AICAR on the 
plasma concentrations of melatonin in the ewe: potential involvement of AMPK?

Menassol JB(1), Tautou C, Collet A, Chesneau D, Lomet D, Dupont J, Malpaux B, 
Scaramuzzi RJ.

Author information:
(1)Physiologie de la Reproduction et des Comportements UMR85, INRA, Nouzilly 
F-37380, France. jbmenassol@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: It is now widely accepted that AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) 
is a critical regulator of energy homeostasis. Recently, it has been shown to 
regulate circadian clocks. In seasonal breeding species such as sheep, the 
circadian clock controls the secretion of an endogenous rhythm of melatonin and, 
as a consequence, is probably involved in the generation of seasonal rhythms of 
reproduction. Considering this, we identified the presence of the subunits of 
AMPK in different hypothalamic nuclei involved in the pre- and post-pineal 
pathways that control seasonality of reproduction in the ewe and we investigated 
if the intracerebroventricular (i.c.v.) injection of two activators of AMPK, 
metformin and AICAR, affected the circadian rhythm of melatonin in ewes that 
were housed in constant darkness. In parallel the secretion of insulin was 
monitored as a peripheral metabolic marker. We also investigated the effects of 
i.c.v. AICAR on the phosphorylation of AMPK and acetyl-CoA carboxylase (ACC), a 
downstream target of AMPK, in brain structures along the photoneuroendocrine 
pathway to the pineal gland.
RESULTS: All the subunits of AMPK that we studied were identified in all brain 
areas that were dissected but with some differences in their level of expression 
among structures. Metformin and AICAR both reduced (p < 0.001 and p < 0.01 
respectively) the amplitude of the circadian rhythm of melatonin secretion 
independently of insulin secretion. The i.c.v. injection of AICAR only tended (p 
= 0.1) to increase the levels of phosphorylated AMPK in the paraventricular 
nucleus but significantly increased the levels of phosphorylated ACC in the 
paraventricular nucleus (p < 0.001) and in the pineal gland (p < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, these results suggest a potential role for AMPK on 
the secretion of melatonin probably acting trough the paraventricular nucleus 
and/or directly in the pineal gland. We conclude that AMPK may act as a 
metabolic cue to modulate the rhythm of melatonin secretion.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2202-12-76
PMCID: PMC3156753
PMID: 21801416 [Indexed for MEDLINE]