1. World J Surg. 2011 Oct;35(10):2332-40. doi: 10.1007/s00268-011-1217-1.

Outcomes of severely injured adult trauma patients in an Australian health 
service: does trauma center level make a difference?

Curtis K(1), Chong S, Mitchell R, Newcombe M, Black D, Langcake M.

Author information:
(1)Trauma Department, St George Hospital, Gray Street, Kogarah, NSW, Australia. 
Kate.Curtis@sesiahs.health.nsw.gov.au

BACKGROUND: Trauma centers are designated to provide systematized 
multidisciplinary care to injured patients. Effective trauma systems reduce 
patient mortality by facilitating the treatment of injured patients at 
appropriately resourced hospitals. Several U.S. studies report reduced mortality 
among patients admitted directly to a level I trauma center compared with those 
admitted to hospitals with less resources. It has yet to be shown whether there 
is an outcome benefit associated with the "level of hospital" initially treating 
severely injured trauma patients in Australia. This study was designed to 
determine whether the level of trauma center providing treatment impacts 
mortality and/or hospital length of stay.
METHODS: Outcomes were evaluated for severely injured trauma patients with an 
Injury Severity Score (ISS) > 15 using NSW Institute of Trauma and Injury 
Management data from 2002-2007 for our regional health service. To assess the 
association between trauma centers and binary outcomes, a logistic regression 
model was used. To assess the association between trauma centers and continuous 
outcomes, a multivariable linear regression model was used. Sex, age, and ISS 
were included as covariates in all models.
RESULTS: There were 1,986 trauma presentations during the 6-year period. 
Patients presenting to a level III trauma center had a significantly higher risk 
of death than those presenting to the level I center, regardless of age, sex, 
ISS, or prehospital time. Peer review of deaths at the level III center 
identified problems in care delivery in 15 cases associated with technical 
errors, delay in decision making, or errors of judgement.
CONCLUSION: Severely injured patients treated at a level III center had a higher 
mortality rate than those treated at a level I center. Most problems identified 
occurred in the emergency department and were related to delays in care 
provision. This research highlights the importance of efficient prehospital, 
in-hospital, and regional trauma systems, performance monitoring, peer review, 
and adherence to protocols and guidelines.

DOI: 10.1007/s00268-011-1217-1
PMID: 21845457 [Indexed for MEDLINE]