1. BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 2011 Sep 27;12:211. doi: 10.1186/1471-2474-12-211.

Motor performance in chronic low back pain: is there an influence of 
pain-related cognitions? A pilot study.

Kusters D(1), Vollenbroek-Hutten MM, Hermens HJ.

Author information:
(1)Roessingh Research and Development, Enschede, The Netherlands. 
d.kusters@rrd.nl

BACKGROUND: Chronic low back pain (CLBP) is often accompanied by an abnormal 
motor performance. However, it has not been clarified yet whether these 
deviations also occur during motor tasks not involving the back and whether the 
performance is influenced by pain and pain-related cognitions. Therefore, the 
aim of the present study is to get insight in the contribution of both pain 
experience and pain-related cognitions to general motor task performance in 
CLBP.
METHODS: 13 CLBP patients and 15 healthy subjects performed a hand-function task 
in three conditions: sitting, lying prone (lying) and lying prone without trunk 
support (provoking). The last condition was assumed to provoke pain-related 
cognitions, which was considered successful when a patients' pain expectancy on 
a numeric rating scale was at least 1 point higher than actual pain experienced. 
Subjects' performance was expressed in reaction time and movement time. Repeated 
measures analysis of variance was performed to detect main effect for group and 
condition. Special interest was given to group*condition interaction, since 
significant interaction would indicate that patients and healthy subjects 
performed differently throughout the three conditions.
RESULTS: Patients were slower throughout all conditions compared to healthy 
subjects. With respect to the provoking condition, patients showed deteriorated 
performance compared to lying while healthy subjects' performance remained equal 
between these two conditions. Further analysis of patients' data showed that 
provocation was successful in 54% of the patients. Especially this group showed 
deteriorated performance in the provoking condition.
CONCLUSION: It can be concluded that CLBP patients in general have worse motor 
task performance compared to healthy subjects and that provoking pain-related 
cognitions further worsened performance.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2474-12-211
PMCID: PMC3196736
PMID: 21951591 [Indexed for MEDLINE]