1. BMC Public Health. 2012 Jan 10;12:20. doi: 10.1186/1471-2458-12-20.

Does the distribution of health care benefits in Kenya meet the principles of 
universal coverage?

Chuma J(1), Maina T, Ataguba J.

Author information:
(1)Kenya Medical Research Institute -Wellcome Trust Research Programme, Kilifi, 
Kenya. Jchuma@kilifi.kemri-wellcome.org

BACKGROUND: The 58th World Health Assembly called for all health systems to move 
towards universal coverage where everyone has access to key promotive, 
preventive, curative and rehabilitative health interventions at an affordable 
cost. Universal coverage involves ensuring that health care benefits are 
distributed on the basis of need for care and not on ability to pay. The 
distribution of health care benefits is therefore an important policy question, 
which health systems should address. The aim of this study is to assess the 
distribution of health care benefits in the Kenyan health system, compare 
changes over two time periods and demonstrate the extent to which the 
distribution meets the principles of universal coverage.
METHODS: Two nationally representative cross-sectional households surveys 
conducted in 2003 and 2007 were the main sources of data. A comprehensive 
analysis of the entire health system is conducted including the public sector, 
private-not-for-profit and private-for-profit sectors. Standard benefit 
incidence analysis techniques were applied and adopted to allow application to 
private sector services.
RESULTS: The three sectors recorded similar levels of pro-rich distribution in 
2003, but in 2007, the private-not-for-profit sector was pro-poor, public sector 
benefits showed an equal distribution, while the private-for-profit sector 
remained pro-rich. Larger pro-rich disparities were recorded for inpatient 
compared to outpatient benefits at the hospital level, but primary health care 
services were pro-poor. Benefits were distributed on the basis of ability to pay 
and not on need for care.
CONCLUSIONS: The principles of universal coverage require that all should 
benefit from health care according to need. The Kenyan health sector is clearly 
inequitable and benefits are not distributed on the basis of need. Deliberate 
efforts should be directed to restructuring the Kenyan health system to address 
access barriers and ensure that all Kenyans benefit from health care when they 
need it.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2458-12-20
PMCID: PMC3280172
PMID: 22233470 [Indexed for MEDLINE]