1. BMC Womens Health. 2013 Oct 25;13:41. doi: 10.1186/1472-6874-13-41.

"Would a man smell a rose then throw it away?" Jordanian men's perspectives on 
women's breast cancer and breast health.

Taha H(1), Al-Qutob R, Nyström L, Wahlström R, Berggren V.

Author information:
(1)Department of Public Health Sciences, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, 
Sweden. hana.taha@ki.se.

BACKGROUND: Breast cancer is the most common malignancy afflicting women, and 
the most common cancer overall in Jordan. A woman's decision to go for screening 
is influenced by her social support network. This study aims to explore 
Jordanian men's individual and contextual perspectives on women's breast cancer 
and their own role in the breast health of the females within their families.
METHODS: An explorative qualitative design was used to purposively recruit 24 
married men aged 27 to 65 years (median 43 years) from four governorates in 
Jordan. Data in the form of interviews transcriptions was subjected to 
qualitative content analysis.
RESULTS: Three themes were identified: a) Supporting one's wife; b) Marital 
needs and obligations; c) Constrained by a culture of destiny and shame. The 
first theme was built on men's feelings of responsibility for the family's 
health and well-being, their experiences of encouraging their wives to seek 
health care and their providing counselling and instrumental support. The second 
theme emerged from men's views about other men's rejection of a wife inflicted 
by breast cancer, their own perceptions of diminished femininity due to 
mastectomy and their own concerns about protecting the family from the 
hereditary risk of breast cancer. The third theme was seen in men's perception 
of breast cancer as an inevitable act of God that is far away from one's own 
family, in associating breast cancer with improper behaviour and in their 
readiness to face the culture of Eib (shame).
CONCLUSIONS: Jordanian men perceive themselves as having a vital role in 
supporting, guiding and encouraging their wives to follow breast cancer early 
detection recommendations. Breast health awareness campaigns could involve 
husbands to capitalize on family support.

DOI: 10.1186/1472-6874-13-41
PMCID: PMC4016416
PMID: 24160268 [Indexed for MEDLINE]