1. Emerg Med J. 2015 Apr;32(4):308-13. doi: 10.1136/emermed-2013-203133. Epub
2013  Dec 10.

Can routinely collected ambulance data about assaults contribute to reduction in 
community violence?

Ariel B(1), Weinborn C(2), Boyle A(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Criminology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK Institute of 
Criminology, Hebrew University, Jerusalem, Israel.
(2)Institute of Criminology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(3)Emergency Department, Addenbrooke's Hospital Cambridge University Hospitals 
NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge, Cambridgeshire, UK.

BACKGROUND: The 'law of spatiotemporal concentrations of events' introduced 
major preventative shifts in policing communities. 'Hotspots' are at the 
forefront of these developments yet somewhat understudied in emergency medicine. 
Furthermore, little is known about interagency 'data-crossover', despite some 
developments through the Cardiff Model. Can police-ED interagency data-sharing 
be used to reduce community-violence using a hotspots methodology?
METHODS: 12-month (2012) descriptive study and analysis of spatiotemporal 
clusters of police and emergency calls for service using hotspots methodology 
and assessing the degree of incident overlap. 3775 violent crime incidents and 
775 assault incidents analysed using spatiotemporal clustering with k-means++ 
algorithm and Spearman's rho.
RESULTS: Spatiotemporal location of calls for services to the police and the 
ambulance service are equally highly concentrated in a small number of 
geographical areas, primarily within intra-agency hotspots (33% and 53%, 
respectively) but across agencies' hotspots as well (25% and 15%, respectively). 
Datasets are statistically correlated with one another at the 0.57 and 0.34 
levels, with 50% overlap when adjusted for the number of hotspots. At least one 
in every two police hotspots does not have an ambulance hotspot overlapping with 
it, suggesting half of assault spatiotemporal concentrations are unknown to the 
police. Data further suggest that more severely injured patients, as estimated 
by transfer to hospital, tend to be injured in the places with the highest 
number of police-recorded crimes.
CONCLUSIONS: A hotspots approach to sharing data circumvents the problem of 
disclosing person-identifiable data between different agencies. Practically, at 
least half of ambulance hotspots are unknown to the police; if causal, it 
suggests that data sharing leads to both reduced community violence by way of 
prevention (such as through anticipatory patrols or problem-oriented policing), 
particularly of more severe assaults, and improved efficiency of resource 
deployment.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

DOI: 10.1136/emermed-2013-203133
PMID: 24336869 [Indexed for MEDLINE]