1. Isr Med Assoc J. 2013 Sep;15(9):485-8.

Do ventricular arrhythmias in athletes subside over time?

Fuchs T(1), Torjman A(2), Galitzkaya L(3), Leitman M(4), Pilz-Burstein R(3).

Author information:
(1)Arrhythmia Service, Assaf Harofeh Medical Center, Zerifin, affiliated with 
Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Ramat Aviv, Israel. 
therese@fuchs.org
(2)College of Management, Rishon Lezion, Israel.
(3)Wingate Institute for Physical Education and Sport, Netanya, Israel.
(4)Arrhythmia Service, Assaf Harofeh Medical Center, Zerifin, affiliated with 
Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Ramat Aviv, Israel.

BACKGROUND: Sudden death in athletes can occur during sport activities and is 
presumably related to ventricular arrhythmias.
OBJECTIVES: To investigate the long-term follow-up ofathletes with ventricular 
arrhythmias during an exercise test.
METHODS: From a database of 56,462 athletes we identified 192 athletes (35 years 
old who had ventricular arrhythmias during an exercise test. Ninety athletes had 
> or =3 ventricular premature beats (VPB) (group A) and 102 athletes had 
ventricular couplets or non-sustained ventricular tachycardia during an exercise 
test (group B). A control group of 92 athletesfrom without ventricular 
arrhythmias was randomly seleclted from the database (group C). Of the 192 
athletes 39 returnied for a repeat exercise test after a mean follow-up period 
of 70 +/- 25 months and they constitute the study population.
RESULTS: Twelve athletes from group A, 21 fromgroup B and 6 from group C 
returned for a repeat exercise test. The athletes reached a significantly lower 
peak heart rate during their follow-up exercise test (P = 0.001). More athletes 
were engaged in competitive sports during their initialexercise test than in the 
follow-up test (P = 0.021). Most of theathletes who had VPB and/orventricular 
couplets and/or NSVT during their initial exercise test had far fewer 
ventricular arrhythmias in the follow-up exercise test (P = 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Athletes engaged in competitive sports are more likely to develop 
ventricular arrhythmias during exercise. These arrhythmias subside over time 
when athletes are engaged in non-competitive sports.

PMID: 24340838 [Indexed for MEDLINE]