1. Phys Ther. 2014 Jul;94(7):968-76. doi: 10.2522/ptj.20130398. Epub 2014 Mar 20.

Clinical identifiers for early-stage primary/idiopathic adhesive capsulitis: are 
we seeing the real picture?

Walmsley S(1), Osmotherly PG(2), Rivett DA(3).

Author information:
(1)S. Walmsley, MAppSc(Ortho Physio), Discipline of Physiotherapy, School of 
Health Sciences, Faculty of Health and Medicine, The University of Newcastle, 
University Drive, Callaghan, New South Wales 2308, Australia. 
sarah.walmsley@uon.edu.au.
(2)P.G. Osmotherly, PhD, Discipline of Physiotherapy, School of Health Sciences, 
Faculty of Health and Medicine, The University of Newcastle.
(3)D.A. Rivett, PhD, Discipline of Physiotherapy, School of Health Sciences, 
Faculty of Health and Medicine, The University of Newcastle.

BACKGROUND: Adhesive capsulitis is often difficult to diagnose in its early 
stage and to differentiate from other common shoulder disorders.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to validate any or all of the 8 clinical 
identifiers of early-stage primary/idiopathic adhesive capsulitis established in 
an earlier Delphi study.
DESIGN: This was a cross-sectional study.
METHODS: Sixty-four patients diagnosed with early-stage adhesive capsulitis by a 
physical therapist or medical practitioner were included in the study. Eight 
active and 8 passive shoulder movements and visual analog scale pain scores for 
each movement were recorded prior to and immediately following an 
intra-articular injection of corticosteroid and local anesthetic. Using the 
local anesthetic as the reference standard, pain relief of ≥70% for passive 
external rotation was deemed a positive anesthetic response (PAR).
RESULTS: Sixteen participants (25%) demonstrated a PAR. Univariate logistic 
regression identified that of the proposed identifiers, global loss of passive 
range of movement (odds ratio [OR]=0.26, P=.03), pain at the end of range of all 
measured active movements (OR=0.06, P=.02), and global loss of passive 
glenohumeral movements (OR=0.23, P=.02) were associated with a PAR. Following 
stepwise removal of the variables, pain at the end of range of all measured 
active movements remained the only identifier but was associated with reduced 
odds of a PAR.
LIMITATIONS: The lack of a recognized reference standard for diagnosing 
early-stage adhesive capsulitis remains problematic in all related research.
CONCLUSIONS: None of the clinical identifiers for early-stage adhesive 
capsulitis previously proposed by expert consensus have been validated in this 
study. Clinicians should be aware that commonly used clinical identifiers may 
not be applicable to this stage.

© 2014 American Physical Therapy Association.

DOI: 10.2522/ptj.20130398
PMID: 24652474 [Indexed for MEDLINE]