1. Hosp Pediatr. 2014 May;4(3):172-80. doi: 10.1542/hpeds.2013-0088.

Is dexamethasone an effective alternative to oral prednisone in the treatment of 
pediatric asthma exacerbations?

Meyer JS(1), Riese J, Biondi E.

Author information:
(1)The Warren Alpert Medical School of Brown University, Rhode Island 
Hospital/Hasbro Children's Hospital, Department of Pediatrics, Providence, Rhode 
Island; and.

BACKGROUND: A short course of systemic corticosteroids is an important therapy 
in the treatment of pediatric asthma exacerbations. Although a 5-day course of 
oral prednisone or prednisolone has become the most commonly used regimen, 
dexamethasone has also been used for a shorter duration (1-2 days) with 
potential for improvement in compliance and palatability. We reviewed the 
literature to determine if there is sufficient evidence that dexamethasone can 
be used as an effective alternative in the treatment of pediatric asthma 
exacerbations in the inpatient setting.
METHODS: A Medline search was conducted on the use of dexamethasone in the 
treatment of asthma exacerbations in children. The studies selected were 
clinical trials comparing the efficacy of dexamethasone with prednisone. 
Meta-analysis was performed examining physician revisitation rates and 
symptomatic return to baseline.
RESULTS: Six completed pediatric clinical trials met the inclusion criteria. All 
of the pediatric trials found that prednisone is not superior to dexamethasone 
in treating mild to moderate asthma exacerbations. Meta-analysis demonstrated 
homogeneity between the dexamethasone and prednisone groups when examining 
symptomatic return to baseline and unplanned physician revisits after the 
initial emergency department encounter. Some studies found potential additional 
benefits of dexamethasone, including improved compliance and less vomiting.
CONCLUSIONS: The current literature suggests that dexamethasone can be used as 
an effective alternative to prednisone in the treatment of mild to moderate 
acute asthma exacerbations in children, with the added benefits of improved 
compliance, palatability, and cost. However, more research is needed to examine 
the role of dexamethasone in hospitalized children.

DOI: 10.1542/hpeds.2013-0088
PMID: 24785562 [Indexed for MEDLINE]