1. J Ultrasound Med. 2014 Jun;33(6):999-1004. doi: 10.7863/ultra.33.6.999.

Do emergency ultrasound fellowship programs impact emergency medicine residents' 
ultrasound education?

Adhikari S(1), Raio C(2), Morrison D(2), Tsung J(2), Leech S(2), Meer J(2), Lyon 
M(2), Lopez F(2), Akhtar S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Arizona Medical Center, 
Tucson, Arizona USA (S.Ad.); Department of Emergency Medicine, North Shore 
University Hospital, Manhasset, New York USA (C.R.); Department of Emergency 
Medicine, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey-Robert Wood Johnson 
Medical School, New Brunswick, New Jersey USA (D.M.); Department of Emergency 
Medicine, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York USA (J.T.); 
Department of Emergency Medicine, Orlando Regional Medical Center, Orlando, 
Florida USA (S.L.); Department of Emergency Medicine, Emory University School of 
Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia USA (J.M.); Department of Emergency Medicine, Georgia 
Regents University, Augusta, Georgia USA (M.L.); Division of Emergency Medicine, 
Duke University, Durham, North Carolina (F.L.); and Department of Emergency 
Medicine, Albert Einstein Beth Israel Medical Center, New York, New York USA 
(S.Ak.). sriadhikari@aol.com.
(2)Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Arizona Medical Center, 
Tucson, Arizona USA (S.Ad.); Department of Emergency Medicine, North Shore 
University Hospital, Manhasset, New York USA (C.R.); Department of Emergency 
Medicine, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey-Robert Wood Johnson 
Medical School, New Brunswick, New Jersey USA (D.M.); Department of Emergency 
Medicine, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York USA (J.T.); 
Department of Emergency Medicine, Orlando Regional Medical Center, Orlando, 
Florida USA (S.L.); Department of Emergency Medicine, Emory University School of 
Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia USA (J.M.); Department of Emergency Medicine, Georgia 
Regents University, Augusta, Georgia USA (M.L.); Division of Emergency Medicine, 
Duke University, Durham, North Carolina (F.L.); and Department of Emergency 
Medicine, Albert Einstein Beth Israel Medical Center, New York, New York USA 
(S.Ak.).

OBJECTIVES: Recent years have seen a rapid proliferation of emergency ultrasound 
(EUS) programs in the United States. To date, there is no evidence supporting 
that EUS fellowships enhance residents' ultrasound (US) educational experiences. 
The purpose of this study was to determine the impact of EUS fellowships on 
emergency medicine (EM) residents' US education.
METHODS: We conducted a cross-sectional study at 9 academic medical centers. A 
questionnaire on US education and bedside US use was pilot tested and given to 
EM residents. The primary outcomes included the number of US examinations 
performed, scope of bedside US applications, barriers to residents' US 
education, and US use in the emergency department. The secondary outcomes were 
factors that would impact residents' US education. The outcomes were compared 
between residency programs with and without EUS fellowships.
RESULTS: A total of 244 EM residents participated in this study. Thirty percent 
(95% confidence interval, 24%-35%) reported they had performed more than 150 
scans. Residents in programs with EUS fellowships reported performing more scans 
than those in programs without fellowships (P = .04). Significant differences 
were noted in most applications of bedside US between residency programs with 
and without fellowships (P < .05). There were also significant differences in 
the barriers to US education between residency programs with and without 
fellowships (P < .05).
CONCLUSIONS: Emergency US fellowship programs had a positive impact on 
residents' US educational experiences. Emergency medicine residents performed 
more scans overall and also used bedside US for more advanced applications in 
programs with EUS fellowships.

© 2014 by the American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine.

DOI: 10.7863/ultra.33.6.999
PMID: 24866606 [Indexed for MEDLINE]