1. Minerva Pediatr. 2015 Dec;67(6):481-7. Epub 2014 Jul 18.

Does maternal obesity have an influence on feeding behavior of obese children?

Cebeci AN(1), Guven A.

Author information:
(1)Clinic of Pediatric Endocrinology, Goztepe Training and Research Hospital, 
Istanbul, Turkey - nurcancebeci@yahoo.com.

AIM: Although the pathogenesis of childhood obesity is multi factorial, maternal 
obesity and parenting have major roles. The aim of this study was to evaluate 
the influence of maternal obesity on feeding practices toward their obese school 
children.
METHODS: Obese children and adolescents referred to the pediatric endocrinology 
department were enrolled consecutively. Height and weight of all children and 
their mothers were measured. Maternal feeding practices were measured using an 
adapted version of the Child Feeding Questionnaire (CFQ). Answers were compared 
between obese (Body Mass Index [BMI] ≥ 30 kg/m2) and non-obese mothers.
RESULTS: A total of 491 obese subjects (292 girls, mean age 12.0 ± 2.8 years) 
and their mothers participated in this study. A direct correlation between 
children's BMI and their mothers' BMI was found (P<0.001) both in girls (r = 
0.372) and boys (r = 0.337). While 64.4% of mothers were found obese in the 
study, only half of them consider themselves as obese. No difference were found 
in the scores of the subscales "perceived responsibility", "restriction", 
"concern for child's weight" and "monitoring" between obese and non-obese 
mothers. Child's BMI-SDS positively correlated with mothers' personal weight 
perception, concern for child's weight and restriction after adjustment for 
child's age (P < 0.001, P = 0.012 and P = 0.002, respectively).
CONCLUSION: Mothers' BMI highly correlate with children's BMI-z-scores. The 
degree of child's obesity increases mothers' concern and food restriction 
behavior. While mothers of obese children have a high prevalence of obesity, 
maternal obesity was found to have no significant influence on feeding behavior 
of obese school children.

PMID: 25034219 [Indexed for MEDLINE]