1. Restor Neurol Neurosci. 2015;33(2):159-76. doi: 10.3233/RNN-140448.

Can transcranial direct current stimulation be useful in differentiating 
unresponsive wakefulness syndrome from minimally conscious state patients?

Naro A(1), Calabrò RS(1), Russo M(1), Leo A(1), Pollicino P(1), Quartarone A(2), 
Bramanti P(1).

Author information:
(1)IRCCS Centro Neurolesi Bonino-Pulejo Messina, Italy.
(2)Department of Neurosciences, University of Messina, Italy.

PURPOSE: Disorders of consciousness (DOC) diagnosis relies on the presence or 
absence of purposeful motor responsiveness, which characterizes the minimally 
conscious state (MCS) and the unresponsive wakefulness syndrome (UWS), 
respectively. Functional neuroimaging studies have raised the question of 
possible residual conscious awareness also in clinically-defined UWS patients. 
The aim of our study was to identify electrophysiological parameters, by means 
of a transcranial magnetic stimulation approach, which might potentially express 
the presence of residual networks sustaining fragmentary behavioral patterns, 
even when no conscious behavior can be observed.
METHODS: We enrolled 25 severe DOC patients, following post-anoxic or traumatic 
brain injury and 20 healthy individuals (HC) as control group. Baseline 
electrophysiological evaluation evidenced, in comparison to HC, a partial 
preservation of cortical effective connectivity and excitability in clinically 
defined MCS, whereas these components were absent in clinically defined UWS. 
Then, we applied an anodal transcranial direct current stimulation (a-tDCS) 
protocol over the orbitofrontal cortex.
RESULT: a-tDCS was able to boost cortical connectivity and excitability in all 
HC, MCS, and to unmask such excitability/connectivity in some UWS patients.
CONCLUSION: a-tDCS could be useful in identifying residual connectivity markers 
in clinically-defined UWS, who may lack of purposeful behavior as a result of a 
motor-output failure.

DOI: 10.3233/RNN-140448
PMID: 25588461 [Indexed for MEDLINE]