1. Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2015 May;38(5):305-12. doi: 
10.1016/j.gastrohep.2014.12.001. Epub 2015 Jan 27.

[Is it possible to stop treatment with nucleos(t)ide analogs in patients with 
e-antigen negative chronic hepatitis B? Experience and new expectations].

[Article in Spanish]

Martín Mateos RM(1), Moreira Vicente VF(2), Tavío Hernández E(3), Cuño Roldán 
JL(3), Téllez Villajos L(3), Aicart Ramos M(3), Arribas Anta J(3), Zaera de la 
Fuente C(3), Albillos Martínez A(4).

Author information:
(1)Servicio de gastroenterología, Hospital Universitario Ramón y Cajal, IRYCIS, 
Madrid, España. Electronic address: rosam.martinma@salud.madrid.org.
(2)Servicio de gastroenterología. Hospital Universitario Ramón y Cajal, Madrid, 
España; Departamento de medicina. Universidad de Alcalá, Madrid, España.
(3)Servicio de gastroenterología. Hospital Universitario Ramón y Cajal, Madrid, 
España.
(4)Servicio de gastroenterología, Hospital Universitario Ramón y Cajal, IRYCIS, 
Madrid, España; Departamento de medicina. Universidad de Alcalá, Madrid, España; 
CIBERehd, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, España.

BACKGROUND: Treatment of HBeAg-negative chronic hepatitis B (CHB) with 
nucleos(t)ide analogues (NA) is usually indefinite, since the loss of HBsAg, as 
a criterion for its discontinuation, is a rare event. Recent evidence suggests 
that discontinuing NA therapy may be feasible in selected patients.
OBJECTIVES: To analyze the rate of virological relapse in patients with 
HBeAg-negative CHB who discontinued treatment with NAs.
METHODS: We performed a single-center observational study that included 140 
patients with HBsAg-negative CHB. Twenty-two patients, who received only NAs, 
discontinued treatment for different reasons and were subsequently monitored. 
All had normal ALT and AST, undetectable DNA and absence of cirrhosis or 
significant comorbidities before stopping treatment.
RESULTS: Twelve patients showed virologic relapse (54.54%). The mean interval 
between discontinuation and relapse was 6.38 months (± 1.9) (75% relapsed during 
the first 12 months after discontinuation). Five received adefovir, 1 lamivudine 
and adefovir, 1 tenofovir and 5 lamivudine alone. The mean treatment duration in 
this group was 38.5 months (± 4.5). The sustained response group had a higher 
mean age and longer treatment duration than patients with virologic relapse but 
these differences were not statistically significant.
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that NA treatment can be stopped in selected 
patients with CHB as long as they are not cirrhotic, have completed a minimum 
period of treatment, have normal ALT and sustained undetectable DNA. These 
patients should be closely monitored during the first year and then 
indefinitely.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier España, S.L.U. and AEEH y AEG. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gastrohep.2014.12.001
PMID: 25636371 [Indexed for MEDLINE]