1. Epilepsy Behav. 2015 Apr;45:248-53. doi: 10.1016/j.yebeh.2015.01.007. Epub
2015  Mar 25.

Literacy after cerebral hemispherectomy: Can the isolated right hemisphere read?

de Bode S(1), Chanturidze M(2), Mathern GW(3), Dubinsky S(4).

Author information:
(1)Brain Recovery Project, Los Angeles, CA, USA. Electronic address: 
sdebode@brainrecoveryproject.org.
(2)Department of Linguistics, University of Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA; 
Department of Psychiatry & Biobehavioral Sciences, University of California, Los 
Angeles, CA, USA; The Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities Research 
Centre, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA; The Brain Research 
Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA; Mattel Children's 
Hospital, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA; David Geffen School of 
Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(4)Linguistics Program, University of South Carolina, SC, USA.

OBJECTIVES: Cerebral hemispherectomy, a surgical procedure undergone to control 
intractable seizures, is becoming a standard procedure with more cases 
identified and treated early in life [33]. While the effect of the dominant 
hemisphere resection on spoken language has been extensively researched, little 
is known about reading abilities in individuals after left-sided resection. 
Left-lateralized phonological abilities are the key components of reading, i.e., 
grapheme-phoneme conversion skills [1]. These skills are critical for the 
acquisition of word-specific orthographic knowledge and have been shown to 
predict reading levels in average readers as well as in readers with mild 
cognitive disability [26]. Furthermore, impaired phonological processing has 
been implicated as the cognitive basis in struggling readers. Here, we explored 
the reading skills in participants who have undergone left cerebral 
hemispherectomy.
METHODS: Seven individuals who have undergone left cerebral hemispherectomy to 
control intractable seizures associated with perinatal infarct have been 
recruited for this study. We examined if components of phonological processing 
that are shown to reliably separate average readers from struggling readers, 
i.e., phonological awareness, verbal memory, speed of retrieval, and size of 
vocabulary, show the same relationship to reading levels when they are mediated 
by the right hemisphere [2].
RESULTS: We found that about 60% of our group developed both word reading and 
paragraph reading in the average range. Phonological processing measured by both 
phonological awareness and nonword reading was unexpectedly spared in the 
majority of participants. Phonological awareness levels strongly correlated with 
word reading. Verbal memory, a component of phonological processing skills, 
together with receptive vocabulary size, positively correlated with reading 
levels similar to those reported in average readers. Receptive vocabulary, a 
bilateral function, was preserved to a certain degree similar to that of 
strongly left-lateralized phonological skills [3]. Later seizure onset was 
associated with better reading levels.
CONCLUSIONS: When cerebral hemispherectomy is performed to control seizures 
associated with very early (in utero) insult, it has been found that the 
remaining right hemisphere is still able to support reading and phonological 
processing skills that are normally mediated by the left hemisphere. Our results 
also suggest the existence of variability in individuals after hemispherectomy, 
even within groups having the same etiology and similar timing of insult.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yebeh.2015.01.007
PMID: 25819796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]