1. Kardiol Pol. 2015;73(12):1327-33. doi: 10.5603/KP.a2015.0092. Epub 2015 May
19.

The influence of atmospheric pressure on aortic aneurysm rupture--is the 
diameter of the aneurysm important?

Urbanek T(1), Juśko M, Niewiem A, Kuczmik W, Ziaja D, Ziaja K.

Author information:
(1)Katedra i Klinika Chirurgii Ogólnej i Naczyń, Śląski Uniwersytet Medyczny, 
Katowice. urbanek.tom@interia.pl.

BACKGROUND: The rate of aortic aneurysm rupture correlates with the aneurysm's 
diameter, and a higher rate of rupture is observed in patients with larger 
aneurysms. According to the literature, contradictory results concerning the 
relationship between atmospheric pressure and aneurysm size have been reported.
AIM: In this paper, we assessed the influence of changes in atmospheric pressure 
on abdominal aneurysm ruptures in relationship to the aneurysm's size.
METHODS: The records of 223 patients with ruptured abdominal aneurysms were 
evaluated. All of the patients had been admitted to the department in the period 
1997-2007 from the Silesia region. The atmospheric pressures on the day of the 
rupture and on the days both before the rupture and between the rupture events 
were compared. The size of the aneurysm was also considered in the analysis.
RESULTS: There were no statistically significant differences in pressure between 
the days of rupture and the remainder of the days within an analysed period. The 
highest frequency of the admission of patients with a ruptured aortic aneurysm 
was observed during periods of winter and spring, when the highest mean values 
of atmospheric pressure were observed; however, this observation was not 
statistically confirmed. A statistically non-significant trend towards the 
higher rupture of large aneurysms (> 7 cm) was observed in the cases where the 
pressure increased between the day before the rupture and the day of the 
rupture. This trend was particularly pronounced in patients suffering from 
hypertension (p = 0.1).
CONCLUSIONS: The results of this study do not support the hypothesis that there 
is a direct link between atmospheric pressure values and abdominal aortic 
aneurysm ruptures.

DOI: 10.5603/KP.a2015.0092
PMID: 25987398 [Indexed for MEDLINE]