1. Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act. 2015 Jun 5;12:73. doi: 10.1186/s12966-015-0217-1.

Are income-related differences in active travel associated with physical 
environmental characteristics? A multi-level ecological approach.

Rind E(1), Shortt N(2), Mitchell R(3), Richardson EA(4), Pearce J(5).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Research on Environment, Society and Health (CRESH), Institute of 
Geography, School of GeoSciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK. 
e.rind@ed.ac.uk.
(2)Centre for Research on Environment, Society and Health (CRESH), Institute of 
Geography, School of GeoSciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK. 
niamh.shortt@ed.ac.uk.
(3)Centre for Research on Environment, Society and Health (CRESH), Institute of 
Health and Wellbeing, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK. 
Richard.Mitchell@glasgow.ac.uk.
(4)Centre for Research on Environment, Society and Health (CRESH), Institute of 
Geography, School of GeoSciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK. 
e.richardson@ed.ac.uk.
(5)Centre for Research on Environment, Society and Health (CRESH), Institute of 
Geography, School of GeoSciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK. 
jamie.pearce@ed.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Rates of active travel vary by socio-economic position, with higher 
rates generally observed among less affluent populations. Aspects of both social 
and built environments have been shown to affect active travel, but little 
research has explored the influence of physical environmental characteristics, 
and less has examined whether physical environment affects socio-economic 
inequality in active travel. This study explored income-related differences in 
active travel in relation to multiple physical environmental characteristics 
including air pollution, climate and levels of green space, in urban areas 
across England. We hypothesised that any gradient in the relationship between 
income and active travel would be least pronounced in the least physically 
environmentally-deprived areas where higher income populations may be more 
likely to choose active transport as a means of travel.
METHODS: Adults aged 16+ living in urban areas (n = 20,146) were selected from 
the 2002 and 2003 waves of the UK National Travel Survey. The mode of all short 
non-recreational trips undertaken by the sample was identified (n = 205,673). 
Three-level binary logistic regression models were used to explore how 
associations between the trip being active (by bike/walking) and three income 
groups, varied by level of multiple physical environmental deprivation.
RESULTS: Likelihood of making an active trip among the lowest income group 
appeared unaffected by physical environmental deprivation; 15.4% of their 
non-recreational trips were active in both the least and most 
environmentally-deprived areas. The income-related gradient in making active 
trips remained steep in the least environmentally-deprived areas because those 
in the highest income groups were markedly less likely to choose active travel 
when physical environment was 'good', compared to those on the lowest incomes 
(OR = 0.44, 95% CI = 0.22 to 0.89).
CONCLUSIONS: The socio-economic gradient in active travel seems independent of 
physical environmental characteristics. Whilst more affluent populations enjoy 
advantages on some health outcomes, they will still benefit from increasing 
their levels of physical activity through active travel. Benefits of active 
travel to the whole community would include reduced vehicle emissions, reduced 
carbon consumption, the preservation or enhancement of infrastructure and the 
presentation of a 'normalised' behaviour.

DOI: 10.1186/s12966-015-0217-1
PMCID: PMC4461897
PMID: 26044262 [Indexed for MEDLINE]