1. J Pediatr Urol. 2016 Oct;12(5):306.e1-306.e4. doi:
10.1016/j.jpurol.2015.07.009.  Epub 2015 Sep 5.

Treatment of contralateral hydrocele in neonatal testicular torsion: Is less 
more?

Kaefer M(1), Agarwal D(2), Misseri R(2), Whittam B(2), Hubert K(2), Szymanski 
K(2), Rink R(2), Cain MP(2).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Urology, Riley Hospital for Children, Indianapolis, IN, USA. 
Electronic address: mkaefer@iupui.edu.
(2)Pediatric Urology, Riley Hospital for Children, Indianapolis, IN, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Treatment of neonatal testicular torsion has two objectives: salvage 
of the involved testicle (which is rarely achieved) and preservation of the 
contralateral gonad. The second goal universally involves contralateral 
testicular scrotal fixation to prevent the future occurrence of contralateral 
torsion. However, there is controversy with regards to management of a 
synchronous contralateral hydrocele. It has been our policy not to address the 
contralateral hydrocele through an inguinal incision to minimize potential 
injury to the spermatic cord. Our objective in this study was to determine 
whether the decision to manage a contralateral hydrocele in cases of neonatal 
testicular torsion solely through a scrotal approach is safe and effective.
PATIENTS AND METHOD: We reviewed all cases of neonatal testicular torsion 
occurring at our institution between the years 1999 and 2006. Age at 
presentation, physical examination, ultrasonographic and intraoperative findings 
were recorded. Patients were followed after initial surgical intervention to 
determine the likelihood of developing a subsequent hydrocele or hernia.
RESULTS: Thirty-seven patients were identified as presenting with neonatal 
torsion. Age of presentation averaged 3.5 days (range 1-14 days). Left-sided 
pathology was seen more commonly than the right, with a 25:12 distribution. All 
torsed testicles were nonviable. Twenty-two patients were noted to have a 
contralateral hydrocele at presentation. All hydroceles were opened through a 
scrotal approach at the time of contralateral scrotal fixation. No patient 
underwent an inguinal exploration to examine for a patent process vaginalis. 
None of the patients who presented with a hydrocele have developed a clinical 
hydrocele or hernia after an average 7.5 years (range 4.3-11.2) follow-up.
CONCLUSION: We have demonstrated that approaching a contralateral hydrocele in 
cases of neonatal testicular torsion solely through a scrotal incision is safe 
and effective. Inguinal exploration was not performed in our study and our 
long-term results demonstrate that such an approach would have brought no 
additional benefit. In avoiding an inguinal approach we did not subject our 
patients to unnecessary risk of testicular or vasal injury. Contralateral 
hydrocele is commonly seen in cases of neonatal testicular torsion. In our 
experience this is a condition of minimal clinical significance and does not 
warrant formal inguinal exploration for treatment. This conservative management 
strategy minimizes the potential of contralateral spermatic cord injury in the 
neonate. The aims of the study were met.

Copyright © 2015 Journal of Pediatric Urology Company. Published by Elsevier 
Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpurol.2015.07.009
PMID: 26708803 [Indexed for MEDLINE]