1. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2016 Oct;71(10):2980-7. doi: 10.1093/jac/dkw207. Epub 
2016 Jun 10.

Assessment of appropriate antimicrobial prescribing: do experts agree?

Sikkens JJ(1), van Agtmael MA(2), Peters EJ(3), Vandenbroucke-Grauls CM(4), 
Kramer MH(3), de Vet HC(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, VU University Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands EMGO Institute for Health and Care Research, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands Research and Expertise Centre in Pharmacotherapy Education (RECIPE), 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands j.sikkens@vumc.nl.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, VU University Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands Research and Expertise Centre in Pharmacotherapy Education (RECIPE), 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, VU University Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(4)Department of Medical Microbiology and Infection Control, VU University 
Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(5)EMGO Institute for Health and Care Research, Amsterdam, The Netherlands 
Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, VU University Medical Centre, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

OBJECTIVES: Little is known about the validity and reliability of expert 
assessments of the quality of antimicrobial prescribing, despite their 
importance in antimicrobial stewardship. We investigated how infectious disease 
doctors' assessments compared with a reference standard (modal expert opinion) 
and with the assessments of their colleagues.
METHODS: Twenty-four doctors specialized in infectious diseases or clinical 
microbiology (16 specialists and 8 residents) from five hospitals were asked to 
assess the appropriateness of antimicrobial agents prescribed for a broad 
spectrum of indications in 56 paper cases. They were instructed how to handle 
guideline applicability and deviations. We created a reference standard of 
antimicrobial appropriateness using the modal assessment of 16 specialists. We 
calculated criterion validity and interrater and intrarater overall and specific 
agreement with an index expert (senior infectious disease physician) and 
analysed the influence of doctor characteristics on validity.
RESULTS: Specialists agreed with the reference standard in 80% of cases (range 
75%-86%), with a sensitivity and specificity of 75% and 84%, respectively. This 
did not differ by clinical specialty, hospital or years of experience, and 
residents had similar results. Specialists agreed with the index expert in 76% 
of cases and the index expert agreed with his previous assessments in 71% of 
cases.
CONCLUSIONS: Doctors specialized in infectious diseases and clinical 
microbiology assess the appropriateness of antimicrobials prescribed for a broad 
spectrum of indications with acceptable agreement and validity, regardless of 
their experience or hospital of employment. However, there is room for 
improvement, which merits attention in multidisciplinary discussions and 
education.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the British 
Society for Antimicrobial Chemotherapy. All rights reserved. For Permissions, 
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jac/dkw207
PMID: 27287237 [Indexed for MEDLINE]