1. J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2017 Feb;75(2):348-356. doi:
10.1016/j.joms.2016.10.003.  Epub 2016 Oct 13.

Is the Retromandibular Transparotid Approach a Reliable Option for the Surgical 
Treatment of Condylar Fractures?

D'Agostino A(1), Trevisiol L(1), Procacci P(2), Favero V(3), Odorizzi S(4), 
Nocini PF(5).

Author information:
(1)Associate Professor, Unit of Maxillofacial Surgery and Dentistry, University 
of Verona, Verona, Italy.
(2)Assistant Professor, Unit of Maxillofacial Surgery and Dentistry, University 
of Verona, Verona, Italy.
(3)Clinical Assistant, Unit of Maxillofacial Surgery and Dentistry, University 
of Verona, Verona, Italy. Electronic address: Vittorio_favero@yahoo.it.
(4)Assistant, Unit of Maxillofacial Surgery and Dentistry, University of Verona, 
Verona, Italy.
(5)Professor and Chief, Unit of Maxillofacial Surgery and Dentistry, University 
of Verona, Verona, Italy.

PURPOSE: This study evaluated the outcomes and complications of the surgical 
treatment of condylar fractures by the retromandibular transparotid approach. 
The authors hypothesized that such an approach would be safe and reliable for 
the treatment of most condylar fractures.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A retrospective evaluation of patients who underwent 
surgical reduction of a condylar fracture from January 2012 to December 2014 at 
the Clinic of Dentistry and Maxillofacial Surgery of the University Hospital of 
Verona (Verona, Italy) was performed. Inclusion criteria were having undergone 
surgical treatment of condylar fractures with a retromandibular transparotid 
approach and the availability of computed tomograms of the preoperative and 
postoperative facial skeleton with a minimum follow-up of 1 year. Static and 
dynamic occlusal function, temporomandibular joint health status, presence of 
neurologic impairments, and esthetic outcomes were evaluated in all patients.
RESULTS: The sample was composed of 25 patients. Preinjury occlusion and 
temporomandibular joint health were restored in most patients. Esthetic outcomes 
were deemed satisfactory by clinicians and patients. Neither permanent 
neurologic impairments nor major postoperative complications were observed.
CONCLUSIONS: According to the results of the present study, the retromandibular 
transparotid approach is a viable and safe approach for the surgical treatment 
of condylar fractures.

Copyright © 2016 American Association of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons. 
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.joms.2016.10.003
PMID: 27818079 [Indexed for MEDLINE]