1. J Surg Res. 2016 Dec;206(2):466-471. doi: 10.1016/j.jss.2016.08.050. Epub 2016
 Aug 19.

Do resident's leadership skills relate to ratings of technical skill?

Gannon SJ(1), Law KE(2), Ray RD(1), Nathwani JN(1), DiMarco SM(1), D'Angelo 
AD(1), Pugh CM(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin.
(2)Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, University of 
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin.
(3)Department of Surgery, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin; 
Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, University of 
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin. Electronic address: 
pugh@surgery.wisc.edu.

BACKGROUND: This study sought to compare general surgery research residents' 
survey information regarding self-efficacy ratings to their observed performance 
during a simulated small bowel repair. Their observed performance ratings were 
based on their leadership skills in directing their assistant.
METHODS: Participants were given 15 min to perform a bowel repair using bovine 
intestines with standardized injuries. Operative assistants were assigned to 
help assist with the repair. Before the procedure, participants were asked to 
rate their expected skills decay, task difficulty, and confidence in addressing 
the small bowel injury. Interactions were coded to identify the number of 
instructions given by the participants to the assistant during the repair. 
Statistical analyses assessed the relationship between the number of directional 
instructions and participants' perceptions self-efficacy measures. Directional 
instructions were defined as any dialog by the participant who guided the 
assistant to perform an action.
RESULTS: Thirty-six residents (58.3% female) participated in the study. 
Participants who rated lower levels of decay in their intraoperative 
decision-making and small bowel repair skills were noted to use their assistant 
more by giving more instructions. Similarly, a higher number of instructions 
correlated with lower perceived difficulty in selecting the correct suture, 
suture pattern, and completing the entire surgical task.
CONCLUSIONS: General surgery research residents' intraoperative leadership 
skills showed significant correlations to their perceptions of skill decay and 
task difficulty during a bowel repair. Evaluating resident's directional 
instructions may provide an additional individualized intraoperative assessment 
metric. Further evaluation relating to operative performance outcomes is 
warranted.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jss.2016.08.050
PMID: 27884344 [Indexed for MEDLINE]