1. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2016 Nov-Dec;34(6):1098-1100. Epub 2016 Oct 27.

Do dermatomyositis and polymyositis affect similar thigh muscles? A comparative 
MRI-based study.

Pipitone N(1), Notarnicola A(2), Levrini G(3), Spaggiari L(3), Scardapane A(4), 
Iannone F(2), Lapadula G(2), Pattacini P(3), Zuccoli G(5), Salvarani C(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Azienda 
Ospedaliera ASMN, IRCSS, Reggio Emilia, Italy. pipitone.nicolo@asmn.re.it.
(2)Department of Rheumatology, University of Bari, Italy.
(3)Department of Radiology, Department of Internal Medicine, Azienda Ospedaliera 
ASMN, IRCSS, Reggio Emilia, Italy.
(4)Department of Radiology, University of Bari, Italy.
(5)Department of Rheumatology, Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, USA.
(6)Department of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Azienda 
Ospedaliera ASMN, IRCSS, Reggio Emilia, Italy.

OBJECTIVES: Dermatomyositis (DM) and polymyositis (PM) commonly cause weakness 
of the thigh muscles. However, it is debated whether DM and PM affect similar 
thigh muscles. Muscle oedema on fat-suppressed MRI sequences is thought to 
represent active inflammation. In this study, we aimed to assess which thigh 
muscle groups are preferentially inflamed in DM and PM, respectively, using 
short-tau inversion-recovery MRI sequences.
METHODS: We analysed 71 patients from 2 Rheumatology centres, 31 with DM and 40 
with PM diagnosed according to the Bohan and Peter criteria. MRI oedema 
(1=present, 0=absent) was assessed bilaterally on fat-suppressed sequences in 17 
pelvic floor and thigh muscles. An MRI oedema score (range 0-17) was calculated 
by adding the separate scores bilaterally and dividing them by two. Inter-rater 
variability was assessed by intraclass correlation coefficient. Fisher's exact 
test was used to compare binomial data.
RESULTS: Age and gender ratio were similar in patients with DM and PM. Disease 
duration (months, mean±SD) was shorter (20±31) in DM than in PM (53±69) 
(p=0.02). The intraclass correlation coefficient between the radiologists 
involved was 0.78. Muscle oedema was more common in DM than in PM except in the 
posterior thigh muscles. In particular, 68% of patients with DM had involvement 
of at least one anterior thigh muscle versus 38% of patients with PM (p=0.02).
CONCLUSIONS: Compared with PM, DM affects more thigh muscles, except those of 
the posterior compartment, which are equally involved in both disorders. These 
findings may be useful to target physiotherapy at the more frequently affected 
muscles.

PMID: 27991408 [Indexed for MEDLINE]