1. J Clin Psychiatry. 1993 Oct;54(10):389-95.

Body dysmorphic disorder: does it have a psychotic subtype?

McElroy SL(1), Phillips KA, Keck PE Jr, Hudson JI, Pope HG Jr.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Ohio 
45267-0559.

BACKGROUND: Although body dysmorphic disorder (BDD) is classified in DSM-III-R 
as a nonpsychotic somatoform disorder, controversy exists as to whether BDD can 
present with psychotic features. If it can, this raises the possibility that its 
DSM-III-R psychotic counterpart-delusional disorder, somatic type--may not be a 
separate disorder. The purpose of this study was to determine whether patients 
with nonpsychotic BDD (defined according to DSM-III-R criteria, i.e., with 
maintenance of some insight) were different from patients with psychotic BDD 
(those whose preoccupation was without insight and of delusional intensity).
METHOD: Fifty consecutive patients meeting DSM-III-R criteria A and C for BDD 
were assessed with a semistructured interview and the Structured Clinical 
Interview for DSM-III-R (SCID). Family histories of psychiatric disorders were 
blindly assessed. The 24 patients with nonpsychotic BDD were compared with the 
26 patients with psychotic BDD with respect to demographics, phenomenology, 
course of illness, associated features, comorbid psychiatric disorders, family 
history, and treatment response.
RESULTS: Patients with psychotic BDD displayed a significantly higher rate of 
lifetime DSM-III-R psychotic disorder diagnoses than patients with nonpsychotic 
BDD. However, the two groups did not differ significantly on most other 
variables examined. For instance, both psychotic and nonpsychotic patients 
displayed significant morbidity; high comorbidity with mood, anxiety, and 
psychoactive substance use disorders; and apparent preferential response to 
serotonin reuptake inhibitors rather than to non-serotonin reuptake blocking 
antidepressants or antipsychotics.
CONCLUSION: Body dysmorphic disorder may have a closely related psychotic 
subtype that significantly overlaps with, or may even be the same disorder as, 
the BDD variant of delusional disorder, somatic type. Inclusion of a psychotic 
subtype for BDD should be considered for future editions of DSM.

PMID: 8262881 [Indexed for MEDLINE]