1. Zentralbl Gynakol. 1997;119(12):621-4.

[Does para-cervical block offer additional advantages in abortion induction with 
gemeprost in the 2nd trimester?].

[Article in German]

Winkler M(1), Wolters S, Funk A, Rath W.

Author information:
(1)Frauenklinik, Universitätsklinikum der Rheinisch-Westfälischen Technischen 
Hochschule (RWTH) Aachen.

Uterus-specific synthetic Prostaglandin analogues (gemeprost, sulproston etc.) 
have been widely employed for termination of pregnancy in the second trimester. 
Since paracervical anaesthesia may be useful during this procedure, we 
investigated in this prospective randomised study its impact on the clinical 
course of abortion and pain especially in the late first and second stage of 
labour.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: 20 women scheduled for elective abortion (fetal reasons) 
between the 16th and 23rd week of gestation were to be given 1 mg gemeprost 
vaginally every 6 hours. They were allocated at random: 10 women received only 
Pethidin intravenously and Butylscopolamine rectally, another 10 women were 
additionally treated by paracervical anaesthesia (2 x 10 ml 0.5% Bupivacain 
solution) at a cervical dilatation of 2-3 cm.
RESULTS: A median of 3 gemeprost applications were administered in both groups. 
In the group without paracervical anaesthesia the median induction to abortion 
interval was 20 hours (range: 8-44 hours), 13 hours (range: 8-36 hours, NS) 
resulting for the paracervical anaesthesia group. The intervals from the last 
application of prostaglandin until abortion and from 3 cm cervical dilatation to 
abortion were slightly, but not significantly shorter in the paracervical 
anaesthesia group. The requirement of Butylscopolamine was higher in the latter 
group (p < 0.05). The requirement of Pethidin and the intensity of pain 
(measured by pain scale according to Huskisson) especially in the late first 
stage of labour were not statistically different between both groups. Side 
effects of paracervical anaesthesia did not occur.
CONCLUSION: Paracervical anaesthesia is a method for analgesia during second 
trimester abortion with a low rate of side effects. It can shorten the duration 
of last period of second trimester abortion in some cases but has no impact on 
the perception of pain nor requirement of analgesics and so with only limited 
benefit in second trimester abortion with vaginal gemeprost.

PMID: 9483814 [Indexed for MEDLINE]